[Amit Varma]: We are born communicating with other people, so you'd think communication would be easy
[Amit Varma]: and intuitive for us, right?
[Amit Varma]: Our first cry on this earth, in fact, is a form of communication.
[Amit Varma]: And we go through our lives as social animals, learning by interacting with others.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, so often, whatever else we succeed at, we fail at communicating.
[Amit Varma]: And this failure harms every area of our lives, from our relationships to our careers to our
[Amit Varma]: own intellectual growth.
[Amit Varma]: I got a sense of the importance of communication in general, and conversations in particular,
[Amit Varma]: when I started The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: As I learned the craft, one of the rules I drew for myself was that I had to listen more
[Amit Varma]: than talk, actually pay attention to the people I was speaking with, and keep my own sense
[Amit Varma]: of ego out of the conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Good conversation isn't about showing off how much you know, how smart you are, or even
[Amit Varma]: winning an argument.
[Amit Varma]: The interesting thing is that there are so few interview shows around that actually share
[Amit Varma]: this philosophy.
[Amit Varma]: Interview shows, especially on TV, are often full of hosts interrupting their guests all
[Amit Varma]: the time, which makes for choppy, shallow conversation.
[Amit Varma]: And their main purpose often isn't to gain insight from the guest, but to catch them
[Amit Varma]: in a gotcha moment, so they can show off their own superior intellect.
[Amit Varma]: This is both rude and toxic.
[Amit Varma]: Every single person on this planet knows something that we don't.
[Amit Varma]: Every conversation gives us a chance to expand our universe.
[Amit Varma]: And that is why, when we are in a conversation, our focus should not be on how we talk, but
[Amit Varma]: on how we listen.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I've been thinking for months that I should ask Russ Roberts on my show, but I hesitated
[Amit Varma]: because it felt almost audacious.
[Amit Varma]: Russ is the ultimate master of what I try to do, have deep conversations with people
[Amit Varma]: that expand our brains and our sense of the world.
[Amit Varma]: His podcast, Econ Talk, began in 2006, and he has had more than 700 amazing conversations
[Amit Varma]: on it since then.
[Amit Varma]: It's a marvelous show that's, over the years, not only given me great insights on economics
[Amit Varma]: and politics, but has also shown me the craft of how to have a conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Besides being the original podcaster, Russ has also been an economics educator.
[Amit Varma]: I first came across him a decade and a half ago through Cafe Hayek, the brilliant blog
[Amit Varma]: he co-wrote with Don Boudreau.
[Amit Varma]: He has written a bunch of brilliant books as well, and has been a guiding light to generations
[Amit Varma]: of people learning about economics and the world around us.
[Amit Varma]: So I finally gathered up the courage to invite him on my show and was delighted when he agreed.
[Amit Varma]: What you're about to hear now is a wide ranging conversation across subjects.
[Amit Varma]: The art of conversation, the nature of morality, our changing political discourse, and yes,
[Amit Varma]: some economics as well.
[Amit Varma]: I've had trouble thinking of a title for this episode, in fact, because we covered so much
[Amit Varma]: ground.
[Amit Varma]: This was one of the conversations that I have most enjoyed on The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get started, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, I'm Vivek Kaul.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm Amit Verma, here to tell you about a new weekly podcast that Vivek and I have
[Amit Varma]: launched called Econ Central.
[Unknown]: In Econ Central, we will help you make sense of the economic news of the last week.
[Unknown]: And we'll also try to explain complex subjects in a simple language.
[Amit Varma]: We will also take events outside the world of economics, like from politics, sports,
[Amit Varma]: literature, and explain them through the lens of economic thinking.
[Unknown]: Why is the stock market going up when the economy is going down?
[Unknown]: What's the deal with high petrol prices?
[Amit Varma]: Should we boycott Chinese goods?
[Amit Varma]: What does free speech have to do with incentives?
[Amit Varma]: Why are the roving bandits of Uttar Pradesh in competition with the biggest protection
[Unknown]: racket out there, the Indian state?
[Unknown]: All this and more in our new weekly podcast, Econ Central.
[Amit Varma]: Econ Central launched a few weeks ago, and is free on all podcast apps, you can browse
[Amit Varma]: our archives at econcentral.in.
[Unknown]: Econ Central, you have an incentive to listen.
[Amit Varma]: Don't forget the URL, econcentral.in.
[Amit Varma]: Russ, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Great to be with you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Russ, it's a great pleasure to have you on the show because not only are you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the writers I used to read very seriously a decade and a half ago, for your insights
[Amit Varma]: on economics, but you're also one of the early podcasters.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, so early that at that time, I didn't really take podcasting very seriously.
[Amit Varma]: But yours, Econ Talk was the one podcast, which, you know, just captivated me for the
[Amit Varma]: incredible range of guests and conversations that you've had.
[Amit Varma]: And you've done more than 700 episodes of that, which is, you know, I've just done like
[Amit Varma]: this is episode 182.
[Amit Varma]: So it sounds a bit daunting.
[Amit Varma]: I want to take you a bit further back and sort of ask you about your intellectual journey
[Amit Varma]: from the time you kind of started and became a student and got interested in economics.
[Amit Varma]: Why economics and sort of who shaped your views of the world, who were the thinkers
[Guest]: who influenced you and so on.
[Guest]: So we could go as deep as you want.
[Guest]: You'll steer me maybe and give me some suggestions on where you want to head with that.
[Guest]: But the simple starting point is that I was good at economics.
[Guest]: I enjoyed it.
[Guest]: I saw it as a puzzle to be solved the way that the theory fit together of consumers
[Guest]: and producers yielding prices and quantities in the marketplace.
[Guest]: I found that kind of beautiful and satisfying intellectually.
[Guest]: And then I saw that it was a way to think about how to make the world better.
[Guest]: A vision that I've now become much more skeptical of, but when I was younger, it appealed to
[Guest]: me deeply, this idea that we can help make people's lives better through economic policy.
[Guest]: We can improve certain policies, get rid of others, add new ones.
[Guest]: And in theory, encourage opportunities for people to grow financially as well as in other
[Guest]: ways.
[Guest]: I saw it as a way to think about what kind of country and where we want to live in in
[Guest]: terms of structure, capitalism versus socialism, free markets versus command and control.
[Guest]: So all of that was very captivating to me.
[Guest]: And the intellectual influences in those early days, I was much more libertarian, I think,
[Guest]: than I am now.
[Guest]: I'm still pretty libertarian, but I was more of an ideologue than I am now.
[Guest]: I was very influenced by Milton Friedman, Robert Nozick.
[Guest]: Those are the two, I would say, big influences of my youngest, and Ayn Rand, who I'm not
[Guest]: as nearly as fond of now as I was when I was a teenager.
[Guest]: But those are people that got me interested in this idea of liberty, of freedom, and particularly
[Guest]: of economic policy that would allow that freedom.
[Guest]: And that was, you know, I went off to graduate school and found a new set of mentors and
[Guest]: intellectual mentors, people like Gary Becker, Deirdre McCloskey, George Stigler, Sam Peltzman.
[Guest]: These are people who affected how I viewed economics, how I viewed politics.
[Guest]: And then, interestingly for me, maybe of interest to you, but in 2003, I joined the faculty
[Guest]: George Mason.
[Guest]: And at that point, I started getting very interested in the ideas of Hayek, the great
[Guest]: Austrian economist, Nobel laureate.
[Guest]: And I spent a lot of the next years thinking about the idea of emergent order, the idea
[Guest]: of complexity, and how individual choices get magnified and aggregated into outcomes.
[Guest]: And that was another big influence, you know, people like Don Boudreau there, I learned
[Guest]: an immense amount from him about economics that I just hadn't thought about enough in
[Guest]: different ways.
[Guest]: And I had many, many colleagues there who influenced me.
[Guest]: But the real change was that in 2006, as you pointed out, back in the Pleistocene era,
[Guest]: I started EconTalk.
[Guest]: And originally, EconTalk was me talking for an hour with an economist who either I knew
[Guest]: or I could talk into coming on the program in the early days.
[Guest]: As you know, when you're getting started, it's a little challenging, and if you build
[Guest]: up a guest list, it gets easier.
[Guest]: And I started to talk to my, you know, former professors and other people who were doing
[Guest]: interesting work.
[Guest]: And that forced an immense broadening of my horizons, first to be aware of the fallibility
[Guest]: of my viewpoint.
[Guest]: I didn't turn against my viewpoint, but I realized that the viewpoint that I had, I
[Guest]: realized that a lot of the reasons that I thought it was the right way to think about
[Guest]: the world weren't really the reasons that I adopted that viewpoint.
[Guest]: I assumed, you know, I just assumed I had all the best studies, all the right studies,
[Guest]: all the good facts.
[Guest]: The other side, they were just wrong.
[Guest]: And at some point, probably after interviewing Robert Frank, who looks at the world differently
[Guest]: than I do, and other people, I started to realize that, you know, this sounds kind of
[Guest]: – this is embarrassing.
[Guest]: It sounds kind of childish and naive.
[Guest]: But I started to become aware of my own confirmation bias.
[Guest]: And I was reading Nassim Nicholas Taleb at the time, his book Fooled by Randomness.
[Guest]: And that set me on a path of a very different intellectual arc of exploring uncertainty,
[Guest]: overconfidence, humility.
[Guest]: And similarly – and I'm almost done with this travelogue – and similarly, I started
[Guest]: – I had a set of conversations with Dan Klein, my colleague at George Mason on Adam
[Guest]: Smith and his book, The Theory of Moral Sentiments.
[Guest]: And that was another complication to my worldview because, you know, Smith is thought of as
[Guest]: this free market economist who wrote The Wealth of Nations, which of course he is.
[Guest]: But he also has this other book, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, where he's very interested
[Guest]: in our moral sympathies and the fact that we sometimes act altruistically and what's
[Guest]: the source of happiness.
[Guest]: And I started to really open up my mind to the richness of philosophy and saw my past
[Guest]: training in economics as just a little bit sterile, a little bit too narrow.
[Guest]: So in a way, I haven't changed much at all.
[Guest]: The things I care about, the principles I stand for, they're pretty much the same.
[Guest]: I just have a different way of thinking about them and a willingness to realize that the
[Guest]: world is not as open and shut as I probably thought when I was 30 years old.
[Guest]: And so that's really the – that's a quick look at what I've been – how my thinking
[Guest]: has changed over time.
[Guest]: I'm increasingly interested in philosophy, and philosophy is about asking good questions,
[Guest]: not about answers.
[Guest]: I'm increasingly interested in risk and uncertainty, too.
[Guest]: I'm always struck by how subtle and challenging it is to think about those topics thoughtfully.
[Guest]: The people who are very confident in themselves in those areas are dangerous.
[Guest]: It really is important to know what you don't know.
[Guest]: So that's what I'm interested in, and at the same time, the country I live in has gone
[Guest]: off the rails, become unmoored, discourse has been degraded.
[Guest]: So I've been increasingly interested in trying to understand how that happened.
[Guest]: What is going – and it's not only in America, of course.
[Guest]: The rise of populism, the really rearrangement of what is considered left and right, what's
[Guest]: considered sort of mainstream liberal-conservative differences, I'm very interested in how that
[Guest]: has come to pass.
[Guest]: So that's another set of interviews and topics and reading I'm doing to try to wrap my head
[Guest]: around that.
[Amit Varma]: There are a lot of threads I want to pick from what you just spoke about and kind of
[Amit Varma]: unpack them.
[Amit Varma]: But the first one I look at is, you know, I just finished rereading your book, How Adam
[Amit Varma]: Smith Can Change Your Life, which is, of course, quotes a lot from a theory of moral sentiments.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the first things that strikes you there, of course, is that, you know, we can
[Amit Varma]: post-facto, we can think of Smith as an economist, but he was also a moral philosopher.
[Amit Varma]: He was also a political philosopher.
[Amit Varma]: He was also an economist, of course, I mean, practically the founder of modern economics.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, when I was looking at the sort of people you studied with and worked with,
[Amit Varma]: like Gary Becker, who strikes me almost as a quintessential 19th century intellectual
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that his interests are so wide ranging.
[Amit Varma]: He has, you know, studied and written on so many different subjects.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas, if you look at the modern time, my impression of it is that everyone is expected
[Amit Varma]: to be a specialist.
[Amit Varma]: You don't have an economist talking about moral philosophy or vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: And how much do you feel that that's a trap for people who are in academics today or maybe
[Amit Varma]: over the last few decades that you tend to increasingly specialize and how important
[Amit Varma]: it is to then do that kind of wide ranging thinking and studying, which, in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you were forced to do by the nature of the conversations you had to have on EconTalk
[Amit Varma]: because you're talking to so many disparate people.
[Amit Varma]: But how important is that?
[Guest]: And is it a rare thing?
[Guest]: So that's a really interesting question.
[Guest]: I've actually started thinking about aspects of that in the last year or so because I think
[Guest]: a lot about what's happened to my discipline over the last 30, 40 years, economics.
[Guest]: When I was being trained and in the decade or so after I came out into the job market
[Guest]: and became an academic, the emphasis was on very high powered mathematics.
[Guest]: The people who were respected and had prestige were the people who could use the most advanced
[Guest]: mathematics.
[Guest]: That's changed.
[Guest]: Today, the people who are most respected in economics are the people who can do the most
[Guest]: sophisticated statistical techniques to manipulate data and try to understand it.
[Guest]: And both of those are interesting.
[Guest]: But what I've come to realize and to think about your question in terms of specialization,
[Guest]: there's a really funny kind of specialization that I think is the most important one.
[Guest]: First, let me react to what you said about Gary Becker.
[Guest]: Gary Becker had, as you said, had incredibly wide ranging interests.
[Guest]: He wrote on the family.
[Guest]: He wrote on crime, wrote on discrimination.
[Guest]: He was the ultimate economic imperialist on politics, of course, also.
[Guest]: He was trying to use the tools of economics to understand all those things.
[Guest]: So in one sense, he was incredibly diverse.
[Guest]: In other sense, he was incredibly narrow because he forced every one of those areas into the
[Guest]: economic lens.
[Guest]: And let's digress for a minute and talk about what that economic lens is.
[Guest]: That economic lens is the idea that rationality, the right behavior, is to maximize something
[Guest]: subject to the constraints of your situation.
[Guest]: So the simplest way to think about this in economics is the economist's view of human
[Guest]: behavior is that we try to get the maximum satisfaction out of life, given that we don't
[Guest]: have an infinite amount of money.
[Guest]: Now, that's a really powerful tool, as it turns out.
[Guest]: In a way, it's kind of it's almost a tautology.
[Guest]: It's almost not so interesting by itself.
[Guest]: But economists take that tool, and Gary Becker was the master of it, and use it to see what
[Guest]: insights they can get or what predictions they can get about human behavior.
[Guest]: So just to take one crazy one that part of the reason Gary Becker got a Nobel Prize is
[Guest]: that he said, let's treat the decision to have children the way we treat every other
[Guest]: decision.
[Guest]: We have children because we enjoy them, and then we invest in them.
[Guest]: We give them knowledge, time, and then they go out into the world.
[Guest]: They might, in a primitive society, be a literal investment.
[Guest]: They might end up taking care of me or working on my farm or taking care of me in my old
[Guest]: age.
[Guest]: In modern times, the investment is more to turn them into a kind of person I'm going
[Guest]: to like.
[Guest]: That would be one way to think about child raising.
[Guest]: And what Becker talks about is the trade-off between quantity and quality of children.
[Guest]: Now, this offends people tremendously.
[Guest]: It offends me a little bit now, but I want to be clear with the nature of the offenses.
[Guest]: So what he meant by that was if you want to have children of a certain ability and have
[Guest]: them have a certain set of skills to go through life with, in particular, let's say you want
[Guest]: them to be college graduates, but you can't have eight kids.
[Guest]: You can't have 13 kids.
[Guest]: They're too expensive.
[Guest]: So just financially and time-wise, not just money, time-wise also.
[Guest]: So what he was trying to explain by that insight, which is trivial but deeply true to some extent,
[Guest]: not the only factor, of course, but what he's trying to explain is that why do wealthy people
[Guest]: have more nights out at restaurants?
[Guest]: Why do they have more cars?
[Guest]: Why do they have more square footage of house?
[Guest]: Why don't they have more children?
[Guest]: They like kids.
[Guest]: Kids are things they like.
[Guest]: They have lots of money.
[Guest]: Why don't they have more of them?
[Guest]: The answer is, which is interesting and provocative, is that, well, the more you have, the harder
[Guest]: it is to have the level of investment you might want in knowledge and time to have them
[Guest]: turn out a certain way.
[Guest]: So that's really interesting.
[Guest]: That's Becker's one insight that you get from using the economic tools.
[Guest]: But you really wouldn't want to, I think, I don't think you want to assume that people
[Guest]: sit around and think when they're getting married, honey, let's make sure we take care
[Guest]: of the quantity quality trade off when we decide how many kids to have.
[Guest]: Now Becker was a very wise man.
[Guest]: He didn't think that's what people literally did, perhaps, that they were calculating machines.
[Guest]: What he was trying to do is often called the as if hypothesis, saying, well, people act
[Guest]: as if they're trying to maximize how much pleasure they get from their children.
[Guest]: So I think that's a very powerful tool.
[Guest]: But most economists don't realize, and this is where I want to get back to your question.
[Guest]: It's a long, rambling answer, but most economists struggle to remember that their models of
[Guest]: reality aren't the same as reality.
[Guest]: I don't think, I'm not sure Gary Becker ever made that mistake.
[Guest]: But most of us being human, more human, we make that mistake all the time.
[Guest]: And you might argue, well, what's the difference?
[Guest]: Not a big deal.
[Guest]: But what the difference is, is that it starts to change how you look at human beings and
[Guest]: how you look at yourself.
[Guest]: And, you know, the example I like to use is the dance floor.
[Guest]: When you go out on a dance floor with a partner, is your goal, the economist would say, oh,
[Guest]: your goal is to get as much pleasure as you can from this experience.
[Guest]: You might want to show off or have people think you're a great dancer.
[Guest]: And what Adam Smith would actually say is that when you're out on a dance floor, there's
[Guest]: certain rules of propriety, certain rules of conduct that you should live up to, certain
[Guest]: expectations.
[Guest]: So you're not trying to maximize anything.
[Guest]: What you're trying to do is live by the rules.
[Guest]: You're trying to be a good person.
[Guest]: Now, those two worldviews, which are get the most out of every experience versus, well,
[Guest]: in some settings, you know, I just try to do the right thing.
[Guest]: Obviously, there's sometimes intention.
[Guest]: A lot of times doing the right thing is expensive in some fashions, so we don't do the right
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: I don't think you want to argue that the economic way of thinking is irrelevant.
[Guest]: It's just that it's not the only thing.
[Guest]: And so many times economists, I think, forget that.
[Guest]: So to come back to your question about specialization, you know, most economists know very little
[Guest]: about other things outside of mathematical theory and statistics.
[Guest]: You might think, oh, it's because they're so – they don't have time, and it's not
[Guest]: the reason.
[Guest]: The reason is they're not interested.
[Guest]: They're not so interested in art history.
[Guest]: They're not so interested in poetry.
[Guest]: It's just not – that's the kind of person who's interested in math and statistics often
[Guest]: sometimes, isn't interested in a wider range of things.
[Guest]: So I think the biggest challenge that academics face today in the world isn't just that they're
[Guest]: not interdisciplinary.
[Guest]: That's one way to phrase your – the point you raised.
[Guest]: They don't understand things outside their narrow silo of how they were trained.
[Guest]: I think it's more – there's a meta-understanding there that's missing, which is we don't
[Guest]: understand often as academics how much our worldview is conditioned on the way we were
[Guest]: trained.
[Guest]: Let me give you an example.
[Guest]: You're raised in a household that has a respect for religion, and you end up adopting – most
[Guest]: people do – their parents' religion, or they leave their parents' religion, which
[Guest]: is the other thing that happens.
[Guest]: But let's say you keep your parents' religion.
[Guest]: The idea that you spend much or any time thinking about whether it's the right religion is
[Guest]: almost zero.
[Guest]: It's like it's discomforting.
[Guest]: You don't want to think about it, and you're happy.
[Guest]: You got a good thing going.
[Guest]: That's the way you were raised.
[Guest]: There's deep primal things that are going on there with family and the transition from
[Guest]: childhood to adulthood, the existential angst of being a human being that you don't want
[Guest]: to tamper with.
[Guest]: So academics have that same problem.
[Guest]: They don't even realize it.
[Guest]: We're trained in a certain – I can't – I don't want to repeat the actual people,
[Guest]: but friends of mine, colleagues of mine, and fellow economists will write me and say – or
[Guest]: talk to me and say, you sound like you're kind of skeptical about fill-in-the-blank.
[Guest]: I'm thinking, well, sure, aren't you?
[Guest]: I realize, no, they're not.
[Guest]: They haven't thought about it.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: This isn't like, oh, I'm so much better than them.
[Guest]: They don't think about it.
[Guest]: I'm talking about the fact that when you're a fish in water, you just don't realize you're
[Guest]: in the water.
[Guest]: I mean that's just such an obvious challenge of being a fish.
[Guest]: If you're a fish, you don't need to think about it.
[Guest]: It's not important.
[Guest]: You're in the water.
[Guest]: You can't live on land.
[Guest]: It's not like you're missing a big opportunity that all you're thinking about is the water.
[Guest]: But if you're an academic and all you can see are the studies that confirm your way
[Guest]: of looking at the world, you're in water and it's costing you because you don't
[Guest]: realize that the world is more complicated.
[Guest]: So even super intelligent, high IQ, prestigious, successful academics that I talk to, they
[Guest]: don't spend any time questioning the tools they've been trained in.
[Guest]: I mean it's like saying, I wonder what it would be like to live in a thatched hut.
[Guest]: Most people who live in suburban America don't think about thatched huts that much.
[Guest]: I wonder what it's like to live in a yurt or what it would be like to ride a bicycle
[Guest]: to work every day.
[Guest]: That's a stretch.
[Guest]: Some people do that and they realize, oh, it's kind of fun.
[Guest]: But within your academic discipline to turn on it or to imagine that there's a richer
[Guest]: or more complicated view of the world or that you're leaving out stuff, that's another
[Guest]: way to think about it.
[Guest]: One thing I've been increasingly interested in is this challenge of thinking about data
[Guest]: and measurability and so much of life is not measurable.
[Guest]: Just don't even think about those things that aren't measured.
[Guest]: It's not like, oh, well, we can't measure that, but we'll keep it in mind.
[Guest]: It's out of mind.
[Guest]: It's out of sight.
[Guest]: My line is dignity is not in the data set.
[Guest]: There's no variable called dignity that goes on a scale of zero to 10.
[Guest]: It's like if I go to an out-of-work coal miner in West Virginia and say, on a scale
[Guest]: of zero to 10, how much self-worth are you feeling today?
[Guest]: We don't ask those questions.
[Guest]: Nobody asks those questions.
[Guest]: If you do, the answers don't mean anything, and they vary from day to day.
[Guest]: But that's important.
[Guest]: Dignity is important.
[Guest]: Work is important.
[Guest]: It's not just how much we earn.
[Guest]: It's the work we do and how satisfied we are by it and how proud we are of it.
[Guest]: Economists just ignore all this stuff because it can't be measured.
[Guest]: We say in the back of our mind, well, of course, we know about that, but after a while, we
[Guest]: forget about it.
[Guest]: That leads to policy mistakes.
[Guest]: It leads to hubris.
[Guest]: That's a really long answer.
[Guest]: I apologize.
[Guest]: But this question of narrowness, I think, is much more than just that we're not interdisciplinary,
[Guest]: which most of us aren't.
[Guest]: In fact, George Stigler, another one of my professors at Chicago, said there's only one
[Guest]: social science and we are its practitioners, meaning economists.
[Guest]: That's the way a lot of economists feel.
[Guest]: It's like our tools, that's the only way to look at the family.
[Guest]: Sociologists don't have anything.
[Guest]: They just make up stuff.
[Guest]: That's sort of the – just as another biographical note, Gary Becker was interested in sociology
[Guest]: and he realized there's nothing here.
[Guest]: Now, there's some brilliant sociologists, but the field of sociology doesn't have
[Guest]: an organized theories.
[Guest]: So I think economics was deeply appealing to him because it gave him a framework for
[Guest]: organizing his thinking about the family, about what we would normally call sociology
[Guest]: or anthropology.
[Guest]: It's a powerful tool, but it's not the whole story.
[Guest]: I think Gary knew that.
[Amit Varma]: I think a lot of economists struggle to remember it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I'm very interested in sort of the question of how we form our belief systems.
[Amit Varma]: Like when we are young, we're trying to make sense of the world and suddenly you come across
[Amit Varma]: a framework that explains everything and it feels so powerful.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like your eyes pop out of your head because you see everything clearly for
[Amit Varma]: the first time and then that's like a hammer you apply to every single nail and you've
[Amit Varma]: made the analogy for a bunch of people have lost a key and they're all gathered around
[Amit Varma]: the lamppost looking for the key, even though the key is somewhere else, but they are where
[Amit Varma]: the light is.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and that strikes me as being very accurate.
[Amit Varma]: I was sort of saving my question on ideology for later about how one deals with ideologies
[Amit Varma]: and things about ideologies.
[Amit Varma]: But since you've sort of brought that subject up in your book on Adam Smith's, you quoted
[Amit Varma]: Sam Thompson as saying, quote, the universe is full of dots, connect the right ones and
[Amit Varma]: you can draw anything.
[Amit Varma]: The important question is not whether the dots you picked are really there, but why
[Amit Varma]: you chose to ignore all the others.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also, you know, you've had Arnold King on your show and he wrote this great
[Amit Varma]: book called The Three Languages of Politics.
[Amit Varma]: Before I ask you to elaborate, I'll quickly sort of summarize that for my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: Arnold's argument essentially is that if you look at the three major ideologies in America
[Amit Varma]: today, it's not a question of somebody being right or wrong.
[Amit Varma]: It's just that they are starting from different first principles.
[Amit Varma]: And from that point on, they are completely coherent.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll, you know, quote from your piece in this, where you write, quote, liberals
[Amit Varma]: see the world as a battle between victims and oppressors, conservatives see the world
[Amit Varma]: as a battle between civilization and barbarism, libertarians see the world as a battle between
[Amit Varma]: freedom and coercion.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And by liberals, of course, you mean the American style liberals, I guess we could also call
[Amit Varma]: them progressives.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, you know, you and I would call ourselves liberals, I think broadly.
[Amit Varma]: And you wrote a very interesting piece where you sort of pointed out that, well, of course,
[Amit Varma]: this is true, that we are often talking past each other and not to each other, because
[Amit Varma]: we don't recognize each other's priors and try to understand where the person is coming
[Amit Varma]: from.
[Amit Varma]: But you also pointed out that these three tribes, as it were, also have their own sort
[Amit Varma]: of blind spots, which stop them from, you know, seeing the world, which I found incredibly
[Amit Varma]: fascinating, because when I read it, my first instinct was, yeah, he's right about the liberals
[Amit Varma]: or the progressives.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, he's right about the conservatives.
[Amit Varma]: Well, how is he right about the libertarians, but, you know, then one kind of reads it carefully
[Amit Varma]: and sees the points that you're making.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate on that a bit?
[Amit Varma]: What are these blind spots?
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, before you get to that, is that something that you have changed your
[Amit Varma]: mind over time?
[Amit Varma]: Like were you once sort of more dogmatic than you are today?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a good question and hard to, I'm going to get lost answering it, but maybe
[Guest]: you could steer me back if I get in trouble.
[Guest]: So let's start with the three languages.
[Guest]: That comes from Arnold Kling, as you point out in his book, The Three Languages of Politics,
[Guest]: a fantastic short read that will change the way you look at politics, one of the most
[Guest]: influential books on my thinking.
[Guest]: You know, those three lenses, those three frameworks, so I'm going to call them progressive
[Guest]: to keep that confusion from happening.
[Guest]: So progressives say the world is full of victims and oppressors.
[Guest]: Conservatives say the world is a fight between barbarism and civilization, and libertarians
[Guest]: say the world's a fight between freedom and coercion.
[Guest]: So let's take an example in the current situation in America, police brutality.
[Guest]: The death of George Floyd recently, the tragic death of George Floyd, the progressives look
[Guest]: at that and say black people are victims and the police are oppressors.
[Guest]: The conservatives look at it and say being a policeman is a very hard job.
[Guest]: Police officer is a very hard job.
[Guest]: If we don't honor them, we're going to have a breakdown in order.
[Guest]: We're going to have looting and rioting and look, look what's happening.
[Guest]: The libertarians say the police are doing all the wrong stuff.
[Guest]: They're obsessed with the drug war, which causes them to really run amok.
[Guest]: Policing should be a personal choice of an individual, shouldn't be the government's
[Guest]: role.
[Guest]: Police should stay out of that and most of these problems would go away.
[Guest]: Now the irony is I think all three of those things are true.
[Guest]: I think all three of those things are true.
[Guest]: I think black people are oppressed in America.
[Guest]: I think civilization is a threat from barbarism, and I think the government ought to get out
[Guest]: of the drug war.
[Guest]: That's not what's interesting.
[Guest]: What's interesting is that it's very hard for each of us to see beyond our own lens.
[Guest]: And so all I can see when I put my glasses on, if I'm a conservative is, oh my gosh,
[Guest]: this looting is out of control.
[Guest]: My house could get attacked.
[Guest]: I could get attacked.
[Guest]: We need strong police.
[Guest]: The progressives look at it and saying, do you know what it's like to be black in America?
[Guest]: Police look at it and saying, yeah, those police have all this military equipment.
[Guest]: So every person is seeing it through their own lens and they're not wrong.
[Guest]: What changed for me from Arnold's book and other conversations and thinking about is
[Guest]: that you got to realize the other side's got some good points.
[Guest]: They're not wrong.
[Guest]: They're not right.
[Guest]: Not the whole story, but they're not wrong.
[Guest]: So all three of those I think are correct.
[Guest]: And now what do you do?
[Guest]: And my point in that essay that you're referring to is that I think each of those views, while
[Guest]: correct, has a blind spot.
[Guest]: So in the case of progressives, they think the victims have no agency.
[Guest]: They can't help.
[Guest]: They have no options, no freedom.
[Guest]: That's absurd.
[Guest]: That's a ridiculous thing to believe, right?
[Guest]: So that lens of, of course, blacks are oppressed at times and have a tough time.
[Guest]: That's true.
[Guest]: But to then go so far as to say they have no agency, there's nothing they can do about
[Guest]: their situation.
[Guest]: It's impossible to make any progress as a black person in America.
[Guest]: That's absurd.
[Guest]: That's not, that's not consistent with the data, the facts, the reality that we all understand.
[Guest]: And similarly, the conservative is right that we want to make sure that the people can go
[Guest]: safely about their business and, and, and walk down the street and have good businesses.
[Guest]: But they often don't think that everything's the fault.
[Guest]: The police never make a mistake, but of course they do.
[Guest]: They do some terrible things.
[Guest]: They're human beings and it's, they're a small portion, perhaps, doesn't matter.
[Guest]: It should be smaller if we can do it ideally.
[Guest]: So the conservatives, you know, I have a lot of conservative friends and I'm increasingly
[Guest]: interested in conservative ideas.
[Guest]: You know, they'll say things like, well, there's all this employment opportunity.
[Guest]: Not right now, of course, because the pandemic, but before the pandemic, they'd say, why are
[Guest]: all these people in, in inner cities in America, why are they doing drugs?
[Guest]: Why aren't they working?
[Guest]: That's their fault.
[Guest]: Why aren't they getting a job?
[Guest]: There's, look at all the employees, if I were black, I wouldn't be like that.
[Guest]: I'm thinking, how could you say that?
[Guest]: You have no idea what it's like to be black.
[Guest]: You're not black.
[Guest]: And you really think you'd be different?
[Guest]: You wouldn't be like them if you didn't have a decent education, if you grew up in a bunch
[Guest]: of streets where everything was boarded up, you really think you'd be this?
[Guest]: So, so the progressives think that poor people have no agency.
[Guest]: They're just victims of rich exploiting companies and, and a racism.
[Guest]: The conservative makes the opposite mistake.
[Guest]: Oh, you can do anything you want.
[Guest]: It's a free country.
[Guest]: Why aren't you making something of yourself?
[Guest]: The answer is because you've got too many handicaps, racism, bad education, a tough
[Guest]: home situation, a horrible neighborhood.
[Guest]: So the each side is having to learn from each other.
[Guest]: But the I think the deeper point is that our discourse, which in America and elsewhere
[Guest]: now is increasingly tribal.
[Guest]: It's increasingly, I'm not just right and you're wrong.
[Guest]: It's I'm right and you're a threat.
[Guest]: You're a threat to civilization.
[Guest]: You're a threat to poor people, black people.
[Guest]: Each side sees the other as an existential threat.
[Guest]: And I, you know, I learned this from Sebastian Junger.
[Guest]: He wrote a beautiful book called Tribe.
[Guest]: So, you know, if you think that the other side is destroying the country, which is what
[Guest]: is the case in America right now, the progressives think the conservatives are literally destroying
[Guest]: the country and the conservatives literally think that the progressives are destroying
[Guest]: the country.
[Guest]: You're accusing your opponents of treason.
[Guest]: And treason is usually punishable by the death penalty in human history.
[Guest]: And you start to think about what these kind of attitudes are going to justify.
[Guest]: And we see it right now.
[Guest]: We see in America the media is spiraling out of control because they feel that the quote
[Guest]: other side, doesn't matter which side we're talking about, the other side is an existential
[Guest]: threat to the future of the country.
[Guest]: It can't last.
[Guest]: It's got to either get fixed or it's going to end up in violence.
[Guest]: It's a scary, scary time.
[Guest]: So to come back to your original question or observation, the quote from Sam Thompson,
[Guest]: one of my listeners or readers, I don't remember whether I got heard from him in an email,
[Guest]: that beautiful quote about cherry picking facts.
[Guest]: There's so many facts.
[Guest]: It's very easy to convince yourself that the facts support your view.
[Guest]: Can't tell many people I debate with it.
[Guest]: They actually believe that a handful of facts means they've proved their case, forgetting
[Guest]: that sometimes the facts are literally not facts, that there are other facts that contradict
[Guest]: their case and they don't even imagine it.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not like, oh, I have a pretty good case and maybe, maybe I need to rethink
[Guest]: some things.
[Guest]: It's like, this is open and shut.
[Guest]: And so the idea of being open to things, not being open and shut, I think is really important.
[Guest]: It's not that good for your podcast audience.
[Guest]: I think the angrier you are and the more confident you are, you then gather around you, your
[Guest]: choir of voices that will reinforce your attitudes.
[Guest]: And I just don't want to be part of that.
[Guest]: I think that's a mistake.
[Guest]: I think that's wrong.
[Guest]: And I think that's part of the problem.
[Guest]: Everybody's in their own silo right now of, of, of reinforcing their own views.
[Guest]: And the internet's really good at that.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm just thinking aloud.
[Amit Varma]: It strikes me that what we are probably seeing today is an intersection of a particular way
[Amit Varma]: in which we are hardwired coming together with the way technology has evolved.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sort of going to, you know, forgive me if I ramble, but I'm going to quote from
[Amit Varma]: Adam Smith, a theory of moral sentiments, as I try to sort of elaborate on this, where
[Amit Varma]: Smith says, quote, the chief part of human happiness arises from the consciousness of
[Amit Varma]: being beloved.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote, which is, in a sense, you know, almost banal, obviously, we are all seeking
[Amit Varma]: validation, we are hardwired to seek validation.
[Amit Varma]: And what's happened in modern times is that earlier, you know, that when the theory of
[Amit Varma]: moral sentiments was written, obviously, it was written with a small group of people in
[Amit Varma]: mind, which is your family and your friends and the people you know, personally.
[Amit Varma]: And we also evolved at a time where we knew very few people, we didn't have access to
[Amit Varma]: millions and billions of people.
[Amit Varma]: So our instincts evolve accordingly.
[Amit Varma]: So when we seek validation from a small group, you know, there is the sort of the benefit
[Amit Varma]: of posturing is a little less because they will be with us long enough to see through
[Amit Varma]: that and we aren't being able to posture at scale to so many people.
[Amit Varma]: And what technology has done is that it becomes really easy to go online to find an echo chamber
[Amit Varma]: of people who happen to believe whatever frame you view the world through or whatever worldview
[Amit Varma]: you have.
[Amit Varma]: And then the incentives are aligned, not towards having conversations with people who might,
[Amit Varma]: you know, behave differently with you, but towards raising your status within this little
[Amit Varma]: in group.
[Amit Varma]: And increasingly, the way to do that is to get more and more shrill, whether you're attacking
[Amit Varma]: the other side, or whether you're signaling your own virtue, or whether you're attacking
[Amit Varma]: people on your own side for not passing, you know, a specific purity test.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, Cass Sunstein use the phrase group polarization for what basically
[Amit Varma]: happens.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that you kind of started your podcast and your great blog cafe hype
[Amit Varma]: when you co wrote that with Don Woodrow, you know, back in the day before things became
[Amit Varma]: so bad, like, I think this is really happened, maybe post Twitter really taking off post
[Amit Varma]: 2010, that things have gotten so polarized and ugly.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what was that journey for you like of, you know, first seeing all of this
[Amit Varma]: evolve, making sense of it.
[Amit Varma]: And then in a sense, you are part of the circus, right?
[Amit Varma]: You are on Twitter?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts on all of this?
[Guest]: Does it make you despair?
[Guest]: Yeah, I want to add one thing to your very nice summary of where we are right now.
[Guest]: I think the especially relevant comment given the title of your program, The Seen and the
[Guest]: Unseen.
[Guest]: So what we see is the Twitter mob, cancel culture, the descending anger of people on
[Guest]: a particular individual who has violated some norm of civility or not civility, a norm of
[Guest]: the right way of thinking.
[Guest]: So that's what we see.
[Guest]: And we're having a conversation about that right now in America.
[Guest]: There was a recent letter signed out of Harper's Magazine about criticizing cancel culture.
[Guest]: Fascinating sociological moment in America, because the people who signed that letter
[Guest]: were very diverse politically.
[Guest]: And that meant that there were some people who signed the letter who you're not supposed
[Guest]: to like.
[Guest]: And some people rescinded their signature because they said, oh, I didn't realize so-and-so
[Guest]: signed it.
[Guest]: I saw that this person signed it, and I think she's OK.
[Guest]: But when I realized, oh, my gosh, so-and-so signed it, I'm sorry, I'm off, I'm out.
[Guest]: So that's on the table right now.
[Guest]: That's what's being talked about.
[Guest]: That's what's seen.
[Guest]: But I think the unseen is what's more interesting right now.
[Guest]: And it's always more valuable to point out or more fun to point out what's not obvious.
[Guest]: We just had a conversation about the three languages of politics.
[Guest]: I chose to talk about police brutality as an example.
[Guest]: You can take what's amazing about Kling's insights or you can apply it to almost every
[Guest]: issue.
[Guest]: It breaks down that way.
[Guest]: I was a little bit uneasy, mentioned in George Floyd on this program.
[Guest]: It's like in the back of my mind, it's a sort of nagging fear.
[Guest]: What if I make a misstep and I say something that's politically incorrect and somebody
[Guest]: takes it out of context and puts it on Twitter and accuses me of being a racist?
[Guest]: Like that's no fun.
[Guest]: I took a chance.
[Guest]: I talked about it.
[Guest]: That's so dangerous.
[Guest]: But I think the unseen that's important in this cancel culture moment is the thoughts
[Guest]: that we have and the words that we say, that we either push back down those thoughts because
[Guest]: oh, that's trouble.
[Guest]: I'm staying away from that.
[Guest]: Or quiet.
[Guest]: Better not say that because that's a minefield, better to be safe.
[Guest]: And what that does is it destroys discourse.
[Guest]: It destroys conversation, kind of like, just to be, this is a crude stereotype, probably
[Guest]: shouldn't say it.
[Guest]: Stereotypes are troubling, you get in trouble for stereotypes, but I'll use the difference
[Guest]: between, say, a stereotypical upper class British gentleman and somebody from, let's
[Guest]: call it a Mediterranean culture, could be Israel or Greece or Italy.
[Guest]: So in the British salon, drawing room, certain things aren't talked about.
[Guest]: Certain emotions are not expressed.
[Guest]: Everything is a bit restrained.
[Guest]: Could even say it's civilized.
[Guest]: In the Mediterranean culture, everything's out on the table.
[Guest]: People are yelling at each other, calling each other names sometimes.
[Guest]: Now those are two different ways of living.
[Guest]: I think there's some middle path that's the right path where you have an authentic conversation,
[Guest]: but you don't necessarily tell somebody everything you're thinking.
[Guest]: That I think does require some forms of restraint.
[Guest]: But if you go too far in either direction, you're going to destroy the opportunity to
[Guest]: learn.
[Guest]: You're going to destroy the opportunity to live vividly.
[Guest]: So I feel like we're heading, certainly in academic life in America, we're heading toward
[Guest]: a world where a bunch of things are not on the table and it can't be talked about.
[Guest]: In fact, I just saw somebody tweeted this morning that if there are any differences
[Guest]: between groups, that's racism.
[Guest]: It's all because of racism.
[Guest]: It can't be anything else.
[Guest]: If you see statistical differences by race, all of it's racism.
[Guest]: So that's a beautiful example, tragic example of what we're talking about earlier with the
[Guest]: blind spot.
[Guest]: And somebody, you know, responded like, what, I mean, there's no agency, there's no ability.
[Guest]: Nobody has any responsibility.
[Guest]: Everything is a result of other people.
[Guest]: I mean, if you think about that, ultimately that's dehumanizing the people you're supposedly
[Guest]: caring about.
[Guest]: But that's where we're going.
[Guest]: If we're not careful, we're going to head to a world where you can't raise those other
[Guest]: possible explanations.
[Guest]: And once you do that, you stop learning.
[Guest]: You're in religion.
[Guest]: I like religion, by the way.
[Guest]: You probably know I'm a religious person.
[Guest]: I'm Jewish.
[Guest]: I think religion is great.
[Guest]: I'm a big fan of it.
[Guest]: I think it helps you organize your life and it's powerful and it gives meaning.
[Guest]: And I like religion a lot.
[Guest]: I don't think it belongs in academic life.
[Guest]: That needs, that's supposed to be something different.
[Guest]: And as it tends toward religion, I think we're heading toward a world where knowledge is
[Guest]: not going to be created.
[Guest]: We're just going to have priesthoods.
[Amit Varma]: That's not good.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I also do this weekly Econ podcast called Econ Central.
[Amit Varma]: I co-host it with a friend.
[Amit Varma]: And our latest episode we just dropped today, we are recording this on July 16th, is called
[Amit Varma]: The Economics of the Chilling Effect, where, you know, we speak about exactly what you
[Amit Varma]: just spoke about, that, you know, the incentives are now aligned for people to shut up.
[Amit Varma]: So there might be a silent majority that disagrees with the vocal minority, but oh my God, you're
[Amit Varma]: not going to speak out because why, you know, invite the mob upon yourself, which is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, incredibly worrying for our discourse.
[Amit Varma]: We'll take a quick commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm looking forward to continuing this conversation when we come back.
[Amit Varma]: Great.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and The Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and The Unseen has been a labor of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Scene and The Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: And I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this, for every episode of The Scene and The Unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and The Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Help keep this thing going sceneunseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Russ Roberts about his intellectual journey, about his podcast, Econ Talk, and
[Amit Varma]: about these strange times that we find ourselves in.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the themes that has sort of interested me, not just at a level of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what's happening to our political discourse, but also while trying to kind of
[Amit Varma]: understand the craft of podcasting and just, you know, introspecting on the ways that it's
[Amit Varma]: changed me, the way I sort of relate to the world.
[Amit Varma]: And that has to do with the subject of communication, how we talk to each other, like one of my
[Amit Varma]: favorite novelists, Georges Simenon, had once said, quote, the fact that we are, I don't
[Amit Varma]: know how many millions of people, yet communication, complete communication is completely impossible
[Amit Varma]: between two of these people is to me one of the biggest tragic themes in the world.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, while I was going through a book about Adam Smith, I found it very interesting
[Amit Varma]: about how you brought up the theme of communication in a context in which is not usually brought
[Amit Varma]: up, which is from his famous quote from the wealth of nations about the butcher and the
[Amit Varma]: baker, where, you know, he wrote, quote, it is not from the benevolence of the butcher,
[Amit Varma]: the brewer or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own
[Amit Varma]: self interest, we address ourselves not to the humanity, but to their self love and never
[Amit Varma]: talk to them of our own necessities, but of their advantages.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, then you go on to say as a commentary on this quote, the idea that other people
[Amit Varma]: care about themselves is generally a good thing to remember if you want them to do something
[Amit Varma]: for you in return.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of interesting that you know, when like I teach a writing class also, and
[Amit Varma]: one of the sort of themes of communication there is that very often we communicate as
[Amit Varma]: if the only purpose of communication is to express ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, to say what we have to say without thinking of the other person and what value
[Amit Varma]: our communication or our writing as it were, provides to them.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, while doing the podcast, which is a long form interview podcast, and I've
[Amit Varma]: only done it for three years, not 14 years like you, one of the sort of areas of communication
[Amit Varma]: I realized was that, you know, the biggest trap that you can fall into when you're interviewing
[Amit Varma]: someone is to make it about you.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, you have to learn to just take a step back and listen.
[Amit Varma]: And you've described, you know, you wrote a piece where you, you know, took off from
[Amit Varma]: Jordan Peterson's 12 rules, and you wrote your own 12 rules.
[Amit Varma]: And the first of them was about how you have to enjoy saying, I don't know, and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: not listen to others merely to, you know, respond to whatever they are saying with what
[Amit Varma]: you want to say, but actually step back and try to understand.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and this is something that kind of has a dual relevance.
[Amit Varma]: One is obviously the personal one that when you started podcasting, you know, what was
[Amit Varma]: the sort of attention you started paying to this, like, do you think that you would at
[Amit Varma]: any level intellectually or otherwise be a different person if you'd never done the podcast?
[Amit Varma]: Did having all of these conversations make a difference?
[Guest]: Well, we talked earlier about the intellectual impact on me.
[Guest]: I think there is a personal impact that I think you're getting at with this, these insights
[Guest]: about conversation.
[Guest]: And your observations caused me to think about something I don't think I've ever thought
[Guest]: about, which is, and it's also prompted by that George Simenon quote, I've never thought
[Guest]: about the fact that we don't think about how to be good at conversations.
[Guest]: I can't think of any format or any parenting idea that where we teach people or ourselves
[Guest]: or accept instruction or practice conversation.
[Guest]: In our minds, we don't need to, because that's what we do all day long.
[Guest]: We talk.
[Guest]: We talk to people.
[Guest]: Listening is involuntary, right, in theory, but hearing is not, or the vice versa.
[Guest]: You can hear, but you may not be listening, I think is a better way to say it.
[Guest]: So here's something that's the most essential part of being human, one of the most, not
[Guest]: the most, the ability to be one of those two, two of those people on the face of the millions
[Guest]: and billions who are trying to share ideas.
[Guest]: And it's just something that happens, we're so good at it, we don't need to practice it.
[Guest]: But what's not obvious is that maybe we could be a lot better.
[Guest]: And I think one of the things I've learned from EconTalk, and I think I still have a
[Guest]: lot to learn, even though I've done it for 14 years, is how to have a good conversation.
[Guest]: And the reason I say that is that I've had a handful of conversations in my life that
[Guest]: I've never forgotten.
[Guest]: We all have those.
[Guest]: If we're lucky, it's a big number, relatively, but we also know that there's thousands of
[Guest]: conversations that never dent our consciousness again.
[Guest]: They may be below the surface, of course, but they're literally, you couldn't bring
[Guest]: them up consciously, and they had no discernible impact on your thinking or behavior.
[Guest]: But then you have the ones that are unforgettable, the ones that are transformative.
[Guest]: And you can ask yourself, well, how do I have more of those?
[Guest]: And nobody talks about that.
[Guest]: Maybe we ought to write a book on how to talk.
[Guest]: I'm sure there are such books, but it's interesting to me that they're not like bestsellers that
[Guest]: everybody knows about and says, oh, you've got to read this.
[Guest]: Books like Men Are From Mars, Women Are From Venus, a lot of people like to talk about
[Guest]: the fact that men and women have different conversational styles.
[Guest]: And I think men, if they're sensitive, understand that they probably should talk to women differently
[Guest]: than they talk to their male buddies.
[Guest]: And women, if they're sensitive, understand that if they want to be effective as a partner,
[Guest]: spouse, friend, that they might want to talk differently to men than they talk to their
[Guest]: women buddies, friends.
[Guest]: But this whole idea of how to talk and how to talk effectively really does come back
[Guest]: to this Adam Smith issue, which is, you know, I think I've written about it in that book.
[Guest]: I've written about it in a few other essays.
[Guest]: A lot of times, it depends on your personality, of course, but a lot of times people just
[Guest]: like to talk.
[Guest]: I like to listen.
[Guest]: And the idea that they're in, it comes back to the metaphor I used earlier of the dance.
[Guest]: I mean, a conversation is a dance.
[Guest]: So if I'm a dancer with a partner and all I'm thinking about are my moves, not much
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: I'm not a good dancer.
[Guest]: So I think the opportunity to certainly be a better listener, but more than a better
[Guest]: listener, to be a more engaged conversationalist is an art that we really could get a lot better
[Guest]: at.
[Guest]: I know that my favorite interviews on EconTalk are the ones where there's magic.
[Guest]: That doesn't happen often enough, where, you know, we just had one for me just now, this
[Guest]: idea that we don't get trained in conversation.
[Guest]: That to me is the high point of this conversation, because I hadn't thought about that.
[Guest]: And the only reason I thought about it is you said something that stimulated it in me.
[Guest]: And I think when you feel that in a conversation, the novelty either of your insight you didn't
[Guest]: have before or an insight of your fellow conversationalist, that's when you really feel that delight that's
[Guest]: possible at a good conversation.
[Guest]: I think most people think of conversation as people taking turns talking.
[Guest]: It's not what it is.
[Guest]: That's a mediocre conversation.
[Guest]: It's better than people talking at the same time or one person doing almost all the talking.
[Guest]: And if you're the host, you're letting me do most of the talking.
[Guest]: I try to give my guests the same respect and floor that you're giving me, which I appreciate.
[Guest]: But I think there are a handful of times in my life where I've been able to step back
[Guest]: and remember that it isn't all about me.
[Guest]: And the more I do that, the better conversation I have, the more alive I feel, the more I
[Guest]: learn.
[Guest]: So I think there's a lot to be said there, a lot to think about.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just thinking aloud here, but do you think it could then be said that becoming
[Amit Varma]: better at conversation, which I think we both define as being more mindful of the other
[Amit Varma]: person and not just being, you know, engrossed in ourselves, that becoming better at conversation
[Amit Varma]: would make us better people and have a moral impact in the sense that, you know, I go back
[Amit Varma]: to Kant, another philosopher you've referenced in your book on Adam Smith, where Kant's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the second categorical imperative is all about not treating another person as
[Amit Varma]: a means to an end, but as an end in themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And what happens is that very often, if you are in conversation, but you're obsessed about
[Amit Varma]: what you want to say in your point of view, and you're not really listening, you are treating
[Amit Varma]: them as a means to an end as a vessel into which you empty your thoughts or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But if you can learn that sort of mindfulness and regard for the other person where you're
[Amit Varma]: really listening and taking in their views and trying to, you know, open your own mind
[Amit Varma]: through that, then possibly you're fulfilling that categorical imperative.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, I don't know if I'm taking this thought a bit too far.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: I think it's a deep truth.
[Guest]: I think it's really incredibly important.
[Guest]: I want to raise a variation on this issue, which seems to be unrelated, but it's not,
[Guest]: which is silence.
[Guest]: You know, I talked to Ryan Holiday about Marina Abramovich, the performance artist, where
[Guest]: she did this exhibit performance where she would sit for, I think it was eight hours
[Guest]: a day, and strangers would sit three feet across from her and stare and look at her.
[Guest]: She would look back at them.
[Guest]: No talking.
[Guest]: So for eight hours a day or so, she didn't talk at all.
[Guest]: And she engaged visually with another human being without words, which should be the most
[Guest]: boring thing in the world.
[Guest]: And, you know, people lined up overnight to be one of the people to be able to, she did
[Guest]: this for months, by the way, which is also extraordinary.
[Guest]: It's an incredible performance of stamina and devotion.
[Guest]: But on the surface, it's just like, what a stupid, that's just like a really, just a
[Guest]: ginormous waste of time, what's the point of looking at somebody for 15 minutes or half
[Guest]: an hour?
[Guest]: You don't talking.
[Guest]: And yet, many of the people who she sat across from would just cry because they were seen,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: It's not.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, it's a very interesting thing in the English language.
[Guest]: We talked about hearing versus listening.
[Guest]: There's also watching and seeing or looking and saying, so I look at you and that makes
[Guest]: you feel good because you're being looked at.
[Guest]: But I can look at you in a way that makes you feel seen and I can look at you in a way
[Guest]: that doesn't convey that.
[Guest]: And there's a, I'm going to give you a bizarro digression, but it speaks to me.
[Guest]: I was watching, this is so tawdry, I mean, I was watching a clip from the Academy Awards
[Guest]: a couple of years ago, when Bradley Cooper and Lady Gaga sang the song from A Star is
[Guest]: Born.
[Guest]: He's called The Shallow.
[Guest]: And in the movie, it's the best, to my mind, it's the best.
[Guest]: I didn't like that movie at all.
[Guest]: I thought it was horribly flawed.
[Guest]: But the first 45 minutes is unbelievable and it's great.
[Guest]: And the best moment in that movie for me is when Lady Gaga, who's been trying to start
[Guest]: her songwriting career, is invited to come on stage, just a little throwaway thing in
[Guest]: the middle of a concert and sing the song, I think, that she's written.
[Guest]: And she's a very good actress and she conveys an ease and nervousness.
[Guest]: And over those three minutes, she becomes more confident.
[Guest]: And to me, the greatest moment in that is that there's a moment where Bradley Cooper
[Guest]: looks over at her and has pure joy that the audience loves her.
[Guest]: And he loves her, too.
[Guest]: You know, that's part of the show, part of the idea of the movie.
[Guest]: He's not saying anything, he's not saying, oh, you're doing great, just looking at her.
[Guest]: But the way he looks at her, and he's a great actor, the way he looks at her tells her it's
[Guest]: worth a thousand words.
[Guest]: So they recreated that, not recreated, they also sang that song at the Academy Awards.
[Guest]: And the most entertaining part of that, to me, is the way they look at each other.
[Guest]: And they're actors, they're obviously not, it's not a, might not be a real moment of
[Guest]: human interaction.
[Guest]: But the reason it moves us is because we recognize the emotion and importance and humanity of
[Guest]: being seen and being paid attention to.
[Guest]: And that connection is so precious.
[Guest]: So I think it's a deep part of morality, and I think, you know, to tie back to what we're
[Guest]: talking about before, I think being able to see the challenges of people in difficult
[Guest]: situations, whether it's their safety or the way they move through their neighborhoods
[Guest]: or their economic challenges or hardship, if you don't notice those things, you're not
[Guest]: a full person.
[Guest]: It's not enough to notice them because we don't always have a solution or a way to make
[Guest]: it better, obviously, it's tricky.
[Guest]: But that's starting place, right?
[Guest]: It's a starting place.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I'm going to come back to morality.
[Amit Varma]: But just to take a small digression, you know, first of all, that's a lovely song.
[Amit Varma]: And if you go on YouTube, what I you know, I haven't seen the film, but I really got
[Amit Varma]: into that song, because there are some great cover versions of it on YouTube by, you know,
[Amit Varma]: different talented people.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like, yeah, so you should search for some of those as one by a bunch of school
[Amit Varma]: kids, some school choir, which is quite terrific, I'll link it from the show notes, in fact.
[Amit Varma]: But what got me thinking was also the moment that you've pointed out that Bradley Cooper
[Amit Varma]: looks across at her, and he's happy for her success that she's singing and the crowd is
[Amit Varma]: into it.
[Amit Varma]: And she's happy for her.
[Amit Varma]: And in your book, you quoted, you know, Gore Vidal, as saying that every time a friend
[Amit Varma]: of mine has some kind of success, or part of me dies, right.
[Guest]: And it also and I was horrible, horrible, terrible thing to say.
[Amit Varma]: You know, a couple of decades ago, a friend of mine said exactly the same thing to me.
[Amit Varma]: And it was while reading your book that I realized that that guy was quoting Gore Vidal.
[Amit Varma]: It wasn't his own sort of sentiment.
[Amit Varma]: But the you know, because I am, perhaps, you know, using the hammer of the economic way
[Amit Varma]: of thinking a little bit too much, the economic concept that came to mind was of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: zero sum games that at that moment in time, and Bradley Cooper looks across at her, the
[Amit Varma]: world is not a zero sum thing to him.
[Amit Varma]: Her success doesn't take anything away from him, you know, unlike Gore Vidal sort of zero
[Amit Varma]: sum view.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And it, it strikes me that, you know, we evolved, our brains evolved in prehistoric times where
[Amit Varma]: we lived in small tribes, and there was tremendous scarcity.
[Amit Varma]: So it's possibly natural for us to view the world in a zero sum way where somebody else
[Amit Varma]: doing well, affects our own opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we feel kind of resentful of that.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not, you know, in modern times is completely irrelevant, because we live in
[Amit Varma]: a world which is largely positive some but I had a question to ask you, which I have
[Amit Varma]: earlier asked people and it's more a question in an Indian context, but I'm still interested
[Amit Varma]: in seeing what you think about it, which is that I think the economist Jagdish Bhagwati
[Amit Varma]: had once commented in 2000 or something, that in China, people tend to have a positive some
[Amit Varma]: mindset towards interactions, where in India, it's more that they have a zero sum mindset,
[Amit Varma]: they're out to kind of exploit the other guy.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a quote from your book on Adam Smith, which, you know, I'll just quote, where
[Amit Varma]: you're referring to, you know, Smith's usage of the term lovely by which you mean, he means
[Amit Varma]: somebody worthy of being loved, and your quote is quote, how do you create loveliness?
[Amit Varma]: In some cultures, it's as if a memo went out saying, quote, there's a sucker born every
[Amit Varma]: minute, all you have to do is find such people and exploit them.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: In other cultures, a memo seems to have gone out that says, quote, be a decent human being,
[Amit Varma]: it's okay to make money, but keep your word and don't exploit people in distress.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote wise.
[Amit Varma]: And my sort of question here is that one sort of theory I have for why India is this way
[Amit Varma]: for, you know, why such a common tendency is to try and pull a scam to try and exploit
[Amit Varma]: somebody, is the institutions that we chose in our economy, post independence, where we
[Amit Varma]: had a very statist system, where the state controlled everything and gave permission
[Amit Varma]: for everything.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there was this culture of rent seeking everywhere to get anything done, like
[Amit Varma]: I grew up in the 80s and the 90s.
[Amit Varma]: And I saw the change that at the 80s to get anything done, you know, to getting a telephone
[Amit Varma]: would take seven years, and you'd have to, you know, bribe somebody for it.
[Amit Varma]: And that mindset, which was in our institutional arrangements, creeped into the culture, and
[Amit Varma]: it's not necessarily something inherent in the culture.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is just me thinking aloud, I don't have any sort of, I haven't done any studies
[Amit Varma]: or surveys on this.
[Amit Varma]: But what would you think of, you know, culture being shaped by institutional arrangements
[Amit Varma]: in such a way?
[Guest]: Does that make any kind of sense to you?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that's a fantastic insight.
[Guest]: I'm going to try to see what I can, if I can riff on it a little bit.
[Guest]: But I wanted actually, I want to add one thing you said about zero sum and conversation and
[Guest]: the success of our friends, because I never thought it as another nice thing, I don't
[Guest]: think I've thought of before, which is, I think, we think of conversation as a zero
[Guest]: sum game, because if you're talking, I'm not talking.
[Guest]: Just a fixed amount of airtime, right?
[Guest]: And that ignores that our dance of back and forth creates something more than just the
[Guest]: transcript of my words and your words that just alternate.
[Guest]: And I think that's really, that whole idea that you're getting at with culture is enormously
[Guest]: important.
[Guest]: In particular, I'm thinking about, you know, I just read a book called Everything Flows
[Guest]: by Vasili Grossman.
[Guest]: And there's two versions of it in English, one's called Everything Flows, one's called
[Guest]: Forever Flowing.
[Guest]: It's a terribly imperfect novel, you know, he died before he could finish it.
[Guest]: It's a sort of mishmash of beginnings of a novel mixed in with some essays on the Soviet
[Guest]: character, an essay on Lenin, an essay on Stalin.
[Guest]: But it's an incredible read.
[Guest]: And I recommend it.
[Guest]: It's dark.
[Guest]: It's a book of despair.
[Guest]: To me, it's a must read about the modern world.
[Guest]: And one of the things that you're talking about that comes to mind is how, you know,
[Guest]: if everybody has to wait seven years for a telephone, yeah, you want yours first, I got
[Guest]: to cut in line.
[Guest]: I don't want to wait seven years.
[Guest]: I got to get ahead of you.
[Guest]: And you getting ahead of me, because if I don't, by the way, you're going to get ahead
[Guest]: – somebody else is going to get ahead of me.
[Guest]: So that whole way of thinking is so destructive, that zero-sum.
[Guest]: And the point is that in some areas of life, it is zero-sum.
[Guest]: And so that's a tragedy.
[Guest]: You think about right now, we're in the middle of this pandemic.
[Guest]: I've been appalled at how badly the American economy has performed in the following sense.
[Guest]: So be very careful what I mean by that.
[Guest]: There's still some shortages of stuff.
[Guest]: How do we understand that?
[Guest]: This greatest economic engine, the productive capacity of the United States is enormous.
[Guest]: And yet we're struggling.
[Guest]: Now, there are no mask shortages anymore.
[Guest]: There were in the beginning.
[Guest]: And I think most of that was due to laws against prices being allowed to move freely.
[Guest]: But there's just some weird products that have some funky natures to them, that everything's
[Guest]: taking longer.
[Guest]: And that's just unusual, right?
[Guest]: The idea that – oh, and in the beginning, by the way, the CDC, Center for Disease Control,
[Guest]: and the World Health Organization said, oh, masks don't help.
[Guest]: And people say, oh, yeah, well, they're just kidding.
[Guest]: They're saying that because they're afraid people are going to buy masks.
[Guest]: Well, that's horrible, because they were suggesting it is a zero-sum game.
[Guest]: If you buy a mask on the street, you person who lives in a house, a doctor who desperately
[Guest]: needs it more than you do won't get it.
[Guest]: And the economist answers, well, let's let the price rise and let the people willing
[Guest]: to pay the most get it.
[Guest]: And the non-economist says, well, that's horrible.
[Guest]: I mean, there aren't enough to go around.
[Guest]: It's a zero-sum game.
[Guest]: And you're saying the people with the most money should get it?
[Guest]: And that's not what the economist means.
[Guest]: What the economist means is that it's not going to be a zero-sum game if you let the
[Guest]: price rise.
[Guest]: You're going to get a lot more masks if you allow it to be profitable to make masks.
[Guest]: And I think that whole mindset of the way of thinking about the world is extremely important.
[Guest]: And it has ramifications way beyond how you treat the person who's get, you know, whether
[Guest]: you bribe the person who can put the telephone in quicker and because it changes this whole
[Guest]: interpersonal interaction that we're talking about, these day-to-day interactions that
[Guest]: are really the essence of life, you know, the essence of life is small things, not big.
[Guest]: Most of the time, we're not doing big things.
[Guest]: We're talking to our wife, talking to our husband, talking to our children, talking
[Guest]: to our parents.
[Guest]: And if you have an attitude towards those interactions that's, what's in it for me?
[Guest]: That's not as good as a world, I don't think, where you're wondering how it all fits together
[Guest]: and to sometimes step back.
[Guest]: That whole idea of stepping back, you know, come back to Bradley Cooper in that scene,
[Guest]: he steps back.
[Guest]: He lets the spotlight shine on Lady Gaga, which is the whole thing's kind of funny
[Guest]: because Lady Gaga's kind of like created the spotlight.
[Guest]: But she's an actress in the movie and she's not famous.
[Guest]: So there is some, you know, the fourth wall of the movie gets kind of transparent at that
[Guest]: point.
[Guest]: You start thinking, is that Lady Gaga who's a nobody?
[Guest]: But that whole idea of stepping back, of him saying, I'm gonna let her get the glory.
[Guest]: I wrote a story, an essay, I don't know if you've seen it, called The Story of My Life.
[Guest]: And, you know, I think we see ourselves as heroes, stars of the show, you know, the movie,
[Guest]: the movie version of my life.
[Guest]: I'm the main character, right?
[Guest]: And I suggest in that essay that it's really useful to think of yourself, instead of being
[Guest]: the star of the show, as more of an ensemble player, you know, one of the cast.
[Guest]: And if you can put your head in that space, rather than, hey, spotlight over here.
[Guest]: If you can put yourself in that space, you're gonna be a better parent, you're gonna be
[Guest]: a better friend, you're gonna be a better spouse, you're gonna be a better conversationalist.
[Guest]: It's just interesting talking about your observation about being hardwired.
[Guest]: We are built that way, most of us.
[Guest]: Most of us aren't built to step back.
[Guest]: We're built to step forward.
[Guest]: And you could argue that what civilization is about is figuring out ways to encourage
[Guest]: people to, those institutions you're talking about, to encourage people to step back.
[Guest]: You know, it's complicated.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sort of going to go back to the question of our hardwiring and how we mitigate that.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, you know, my listeners keep asking me about interviewing and the art of
[Amit Varma]: the interview and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a great quote from you that, there's a great passage that you've written that I
[Amit Varma]: just want to read out for their benefit, because I couldn't agree with it more, I think it's
[Amit Varma]: profoundly insightful.
[Amit Varma]: You're right, quote, take the most basic human interaction conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone knows people who talk too much about themselves, hogging the conversation and taking
[Amit Varma]: more than their share of the airtime.
[Amit Varma]: It's harder to notice that sometimes you are that person, we like to talk about ourselves,
[Amit Varma]: we like to make our points, we have so much to say.
[Amit Varma]: How many times do you answer a question in conversation and wait for another, instead
[Amit Varma]: of asking the person you're talking to about herself?
[Amit Varma]: How often do you listen for understanding, rather than waiting for the other person to
[Amit Varma]: finish so you can make another point or tell another story?
[Amit Varma]: How would an imaginary spectator judge your conversational style, imagining an impartial
[Amit Varma]: spectator can help you turn your conversation into more of a dance and less an exercise
[Amit Varma]: in taking turns, a dialogue rather than competing monologues, stop quote, and of course, by
[Amit Varma]: impartial spectator, you're invoking Smith himself who sort of use that term, I want
[Amit Varma]: to sort of come back to our hardwiring because you know, a thought that's always struck me
[Amit Varma]: and one way in which you know, humans are unique is that it's turned out by accident
[Amit Varma]: that our hardwiring allows us to fight itself.
[Amit Varma]: We are the only species which is always trying to mitigate the way we are wired in different
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Amit Varma]: We are not wired to care about ourselves and to be tribalistic, but we learn and of course,
[Amit Varma]: we have competing instincts as well.
[Amit Varma]: And we are wired in a bunch of different contradictory ways.
[Amit Varma]: But a lot of the ways that we consider harmful the tribalism, the sort of selfishness, we
[Amit Varma]: learn to mitigate that through culture, we build these norms that this is what we should
[Amit Varma]: do.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if you go to a restaurant, even if you're never going there again, we will
[Amit Varma]: tip because there's no self interest.
[Amit Varma]: It's just a normative thing.
[Amit Varma]: We vote in elections because it's a normative thing.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of the sort of the growth of humanity, especially, perhaps since the Enlightenment
[Amit Varma]: is figuring out ways in which nurture can mitigate nature.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, it often reinforces nature as well.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I had, I think until a few years ago, naively assumed that this is an inevitable
[Amit Varma]: process that will continue fighting this battle, and sort of winning it that the arc of history
[Amit Varma]: will go in a particular good direction, whether it's towards liberty or towards justice or
[Amit Varma]: whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But in our modern times, you know, we discussed earlier in the show how the tribalistic that
[Amit Varma]: discourse has become how it's so polarized, no one's talking to each other anymore, everyone's
[Amit Varma]: talking past each other.
[Amit Varma]: You know, without taking names, you look at the politics in your country or the politics
[Amit Varma]: in my country, and suddenly you feel like the world is going backward very fast.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you look upon this?
[Amit Varma]: Because I just feel profoundly disillusioned that I thought, okay, this is like the defining
[Amit Varma]: battle of our species, we'll beat our hardwiring in all these different ways.
[Amit Varma]: And suddenly the worst aspects of it are getting reinforced.
[Guest]: Boy, I don't know, I'm not sure I have anything to say about that.
[Guest]: You know, I think a lot about my own hardwiring.
[Guest]: It's weird, we're hardwired as a species.
[Guest]: But I get a few special things in my brain, and you have different special ones in yours
[Guest]: that aren't the same as mine to overcome.
[Guest]: You know, we all have our own, everybody's flawed, but our flaws are all a little bit
[Guest]: different.
[Guest]: We share some common flaws, but we get our own dose of it, our own variation, our own
[Guest]: style of flaw.
[Guest]: And I've been thinking lately about this, it's, I don't know if I'm going to answer
[Guest]: your question, Amit, this might just be off the deep end, but I've been thinking lately
[Guest]: about my two selves, the self that's hardwired and the other self.
[Guest]: So to give a simple version, it's five o'clock, maybe it's 5.30, I'm going to be eating
[Guest]: dinner pretty soon, but I want to eat something, just, I don't know why, I'm not hungry really.
[Guest]: But my head says, grab a handful of peanuts or eat a banana or what it really wants is
[Guest]: a bowl of ice cream, but I'm not that depraved.
[Guest]: But my mind, a set of habits that I've developed over time of snacking, say, go for it.
[Guest]: And it's interesting, there's one level, so we're talking about this overcoming our
[Guest]: hardwires, that's where I'm trying to get at.
[Guest]: At one level I can say, oh, I have an urge for food that's not really hunger-based, but
[Guest]: I eat it anyway most of the time, right?
[Guest]: Weird.
[Guest]: I'm aware that I'm doing something I don't really want to do, but I do it anyway.
[Guest]: But being aware is a starting point, that's a good thing.
[Guest]: But sometimes I'm trying this new trick where I say, that's not me, this is a very common
[Guest]: theme in Buddhism, I see it in Judaism as well, certain thematic ideas of this sort
[Guest]: of split self.
[Guest]: And when you can step, this comes back to the impartial specter a little bit, when you
[Guest]: step outside yourself and say, oh, I don't want to be that guy that's snacking, or I
[Guest]: don't, that's a trivial example, I don't want to be that guy who gets irritated.
[Guest]: Let's say something that annoys you, not an injustice, but something that just annoys
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: It might be traffic, habit of a friend, just something that gets on your nerves.
[Guest]: And you think, if you step outside yourself, you go like, well, that's stupid, that's not
[Guest]: important, why is that bothering me?
[Guest]: And how hard that is to do, why is that so hard?
[Guest]: So I really think, I think that, I like to say that being grown up is learning how to
[Guest]: be aware of those things and fight against them.
[Guest]: And I think, now to come back to your more serious part of your question, and to bring
[Guest]: it back to your question of a minute ago, institutions, in theory, can help you become
[Guest]: more civilized, or they can push you the other way.
[Guest]: And right now in America, maybe in India, institutions are pushing us away from civilization.
[Guest]: And the problem with institutions is, they're not designed, they emerge.
[Guest]: You can't just say, I want to fix that, I'm going to stop that institution.
[Guest]: A better way to say it is, there are certain norms of behavior that have become standard
[Guest]: that those are bad norms, like, and then how do you reverse them?
[Guest]: A lot of people have been writing some depressing, but I think thoughtful quotes, I don't remember
[Guest]: where they're from, who said them, but they're basically things like, it might take centuries
[Guest]: to build up a habit of a culture.
[Guest]: You could destroy them in a month, and you can't build them back in a month, takes another
[Guest]: few centuries.
[Guest]: I feel like we've torn down a lot of useful things recently, like that, interactions.
[Guest]: So I'm very worried about that.
[Guest]: Like you, I used to be much more optimistic about the arc of history, turning, tending
[Guest]: towards justice or truth or civility.
[Guest]: And my new quote, which is, my depressing quote is, the veneer of civilization is thin.
[Guest]: Not that much separating us from a much darker set of behaviors.
[Guest]: And I think, depending on what circles you travel in, there's a naivete about the security
[Guest]: of the world we live in and how persistent and reliable it is.
[Guest]: A lot of this could go south.
[Guest]: This pandemic's exposing a lot of problems like that.
[Guest]: Certainly the response in America, these issues of race are very much in flux of how they're
[Guest]: going to, where they're going to go.
[Guest]: I don't know where they're going to go.
[Guest]: Or more importantly, our national narrative, you know, what does it mean to be an American?
[Guest]: What does it mean, what is the American narrative?
[Guest]: And there's more than one.
[Guest]: And when you don't share one, and you don't respect the other person's narrative, it's
[Guest]: hard to have a country.
[Guest]: So those are the things that bother me.
[Guest]: But to come back to your other question, I think, just at the personal level, it's just
[Guest]: really hard to overcome our hardwiring.
[Guest]: Being aware of it, as you say, is a remarkable human trait.
[Guest]: No squirrel thinks, you know, I really shouldn't be eating that bird food.
[Guest]: That's for the birds.
[Guest]: He gets on that bird feeder with zeal.
[Guest]: He is so excited to be on that bird feeder.
[Guest]: That's a squirrel.
[Guest]: We don't want to be squirrels.
[Guest]: We want to be human beings.
[Guest]: And yet, we got a squirrel side that's pushing us that way all the time.
[Amit Varma]: And one could argue that another trait that we have, which other species possibly don't
[Amit Varma]: have, and you've devoted a chapter to this trait in your book on Adam Smith as well,
[Amit Varma]: is that of self-deception.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's a great quote by Smith from the Theory of Moral Sentiments, where he says,
[Amit Varma]: quote, the violence and injustice of our own selfish passions are sometimes sufficient
[Amit Varma]: to induce a man within the breast to make a report very different from what the real
[Amit Varma]: circumstances of the case are capable of authorizing, stop quote, and a slightly oldish language.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, the broad sense is that we are constantly deluding ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: And a tangential question, are we deluding ourselves to the extent that there is no free
[Amit Varma]: will, but we behave as if there is?
[Guest]: Well, I can't, I don't think I have anything useful to say about that.
[Amit Varma]: But which side of the free will debate do you fall into?
[Guest]: I tend to be on the pro-free will side, you know, you know, what's the joke?
[Guest]: Of course, I believe in free will, I don't have a choice.
[Guest]: But I think that's some truth in that joke, obviously.
[Guest]: We certainly feel like we have free will.
[Guest]: We know that feeling because, you know, I mentioned the snacking challenge.
[Guest]: There are times in my life when I say no to a snack.
[Guest]: So it means it's possible.
[Guest]: I don't fully understand what those times are, or how to get more of them.
[Guest]: And it could just be that those are just moments when there's a set of chemicals going on that
[Guest]: I don't control, but it feels like I control them for sure.
[Guest]: And I lost the track of what your first part was.
[Amit Varma]: I kind of began to ask a question and ended in an aside.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll kind of finish the rest of the question, which is, you know, a theory that I've had
[Amit Varma]: is that to be good at anything is necessary to be self delusional, because otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: we don't begin doing something because we suck at it.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we never get good at anything, because we don't iterate enough to learn from
[Amit Varma]: practice.
[Amit Varma]: But that's an aside.
[Amit Varma]: But my question is that, you know, through your long intellectual journey that has taken
[Amit Varma]: all of these decades, and you mentioned about how you grew intellectually through the conversations
[Amit Varma]: you had on econ talk, the more than 700 episodes, looking back at yourself, do you think that
[Amit Varma]: there are times where you were self delusional in some way or the other?
[Amit Varma]: And you kind of managed to take a step back?
[Amit Varma]: And now you look at things differently?
[Amit Varma]: I'm sorry, that question sounds rude.
[Guest]: It's not intended.
[Guest]: No, no, I know.
[Guest]: I understand.
[Guest]: And I think the I see my dark side on Twitter, when someone says something that I think is
[Guest]: wrong.
[Guest]: And I jumped to announce that it's wrong.
[Guest]: And I failed to see if it's taken out of context, if it's, you know, or I retweet something
[Guest]: and then later realize that was a terrible study that why would I retweet that?
[Guest]: Oh, because it confirmed my attitude toward the pandemic.
[Guest]: That's why.
[Guest]: So I think it's, we all have this self delusion problem.
[Guest]: You know, I can't, I won't get the quote right.
[Guest]: But Smith says something like, bold is the surgeon whose hand does not tremble when he
[Guest]: operates upon himself.
[Amit Varma]: That is, you know, I have it, I'll read it out.
[Amit Varma]: Smith says, quote, he is a bold surgeon, they say, whose hand does not tremble when he performs
[Amit Varma]: an operation upon his own person.
[Amit Varma]: And he is often equally bold, who does not hesitate to pull off the mysterious veil of
[Amit Varma]: self delusion, which covers from his view, the deformities of his own conduct.
[Guest]: Yeah, we don't like to see those deformities, or we revel in those deformities, and we become
[Guest]: dysfunctional because we see ourselves as failures.
[Guest]: That's a tough road to navigate.
[Guest]: We don't want to be overly confident.
[Guest]: But we also don't want to have such low self esteem that we can't be effective.
[Guest]: You talked earlier about a minute ago about the challenge of, I will call it the challenge
[Guest]: of ineptitude.
[Guest]: You start off playing an instrument or learning a language or almost any skill, as you point
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: And I've been playing a lot of chess online, at chess.com, chess.com gives you a score
[Guest]: for it's bad enough that there's winners and losers, pretty much a zero sum game in chess.
[Guest]: But they give you a score so you can see how am I doing, which seems like a good thing.
[Guest]: That's like, oh my gosh, I lost that game.
[Guest]: I had checkmate.
[Guest]: I missed it.
[Guest]: And I lost eight points.
[Guest]: It's like, what do you do?
[Guest]: What's wrong with you?
[Guest]: Why are you doing that to yourself?
[Guest]: So I think it's very hard, very hard for us to, you know, to suffer through the feeling
[Guest]: of inadequacy that comes when you tackle something new.
[Guest]: And we're afraid of those things.
[Guest]: We don't want to deal with that.
[Guest]: Why would I want to feel bad about myself?
[Guest]: So we shy away.
[Guest]: I was back to earlier conversation about inappropriate remarks and cancel culture.
[Guest]: I don't want to be seen as one of those people.
[Guest]: I better keep quiet.
[Guest]: And similarly, I don't want to be seen as incompetent.
[Guest]: I better not try to do that because I'll just be bad at it.
[Guest]: That kills growth.
[Guest]: That kills exploration.
[Guest]: That's a terrible handicap.
[Guest]: I should not fool myself and go try out for the National Basketball Association, the NBA.
[Guest]: I'm five foot six and 65 years old and don't have much athletic ability.
[Guest]: So that would be, it's smart to not try to be a professional basketball player.
[Guest]: But it's fun to learn, get a little better at chess.
[Guest]: I'm kind of enjoying it.
[Guest]: But you know, for a while I had a really low score and my kids laughed at me.
[Guest]: So this comes back to that observation that you quoted of mine where I said, don't be
[Guest]: afraid to say, I don't know.
[Guest]: Once you are comfortable saying, I don't know, it's very liberating.
[Guest]: And similarly, we're talking now about the comfort of saying, yeah, I'm not that good
[Guest]: at that.
[Guest]: We don't like to admit that to ourselves.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's false modesty.
[Guest]: Sometimes, of course, we're really good at it.
[Guest]: We just say that to try to look modest.
[Guest]: But there are a lot of things I do badly that I still enjoy.
[Guest]: And I love the progress and the getting better part of it.
[Guest]: I think that's an important part of the human enterprise.
[Guest]: So I think that's a really interesting insight that we don't like to be reminded of our own
[Guest]: failures and incompetencies.
[Guest]: You know, one more thought, I'm sorry I'm rambling, but there's this really interesting
[Guest]: idea of the imposter syndrome, this idea that people are going to figure out that you don't
[Guest]: know what you're doing.
[Guest]: None of us know what we're doing.
[Guest]: We're all imposters to some extent.
[Guest]: We're all brave.
[Guest]: We're all wearing this armor to keep us from being revealed of our true mix of imperfection.
[Guest]: And that's a bad way to go through life.
[Guest]: And I understand how hard it is to be revealed that your true self, like Smith says.
[Guest]: But most of us could use a little more of it.
[Guest]: I think it's probably a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I play a lot on chess.com as well, though, under a pseudonym and a girl's avatar.
[Amit Varma]: So I get hit on a lot as well by horny Indian boys.
[Amit Varma]: And a couple of thoughts before I sort of move on to the great sociological insight
[Amit Varma]: though, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because how else would I get that insight?
[Amit Varma]: And one is that, you know, therefore, it kind of strikes me thinking aloud that self delusion
[Amit Varma]: might actually in some ways be a feature, not a bug.
[Amit Varma]: If you're not hardwired with it, how do we cope with the complexity of the world and
[Amit Varma]: the complexity of whatever we try to do?
[Amit Varma]: And there's also something called the Dunning-Kruger effect, which, you know, works two ways.
[Amit Varma]: One of the ways, of course, is that people who are incompetent don't know enough to know
[Amit Varma]: how incompetent they are.
[Amit Varma]: So they think they are better than they otherwise would be.
[Amit Varma]: But the other side is that people who are extremely good, they imagine because it's
[Amit Varma]: so easy for them, they imagine that it must be easy for others also.
[Amit Varma]: And they are probably the ones more likely to suffer from the imposter effect.
[Amit Varma]: Now, sort of what you said about Twitter kind of brings me to my next question, because
[Amit Varma]: I sort of see the worst side of myself on Twitter as well, where somebody will say something
[Amit Varma]: so rude or so stupid or so outrageous that I kind of, you know, these days, I try to
[Amit Varma]: stop myself from tweeting reactively and, you know, just let it go.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing there is that the cost for someone entering that kind of conversation,
[Amit Varma]: the person who's making the tweet or trolling me or calling me names or whatever, is literally
[Amit Varma]: zero.
[Amit Varma]: There is practically no cost there as well, while typically in the real world, you enter
[Amit Varma]: a conversation, there is a cost to it.
[Amit Varma]: And part of what enables it is technology and the access to gadgets that we have, which
[Amit Varma]: brings me to a related question.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, you know, another Adam Smith quote from the theory of moral sentiments,
[Amit Varma]: where Smith writes, and this is 250 years ago, and he could be talking about cell phones,
[Amit Varma]: quote, how many people ruin themselves by laying out money on trinkets of frivolous
[Amit Varma]: utility?
[Amit Varma]: What pleases these lovers of toys is not so much the utility as the aptness of the machines
[Amit Varma]: which are fitted to promote it.
[Amit Varma]: All their pockets are stuffed with little conveniences.
[Amit Varma]: They contrive new pockets unknown in the clothes of other people in order to carry a greater
[Amit Varma]: number, stop code.
[Amit Varma]: And my question here is that it strikes me that, in a sense, we are shaped by our gadgets.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, neuroscientists have found that every time we are in deep concentration
[Amit Varma]: at some kind of work, and we are distracted by something, it takes, you know, more than
[Amit Varma]: 20 minutes to get back into that state of deep concentration.
[Amit Varma]: And because we are surrounded by distractions all the time, because we are seeking out the
[Amit Varma]: dopamine rushes of the Twitter notifications and the Facebook likes, that we are constantly
[Amit Varma]: in a state of shallow concentration.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, where we could once pursue deep learning or deep conversations, we now
[Amit Varma]: have to make do with shallow knowledge where we'll click something on social media or react
[Amit Varma]: to a headline.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, if you're interested in a subject, quickly scan the Wikipedia page rather than
[Amit Varma]: read actual books.
[Amit Varma]: And this shows through in our conversations.
[Amit Varma]: And my question is, as an educator, which is, you know, a part of your persona, we haven't
[Amit Varma]: really explored enough today, and maybe we'll leave it for another day.
[Amit Varma]: But as an educator, do you find that that changed the way people learn?
[Amit Varma]: Do you see that in your students, for example, is that another competitor for, you know,
[Amit Varma]: their attention along with what you're what you're teaching?
[Amit Varma]: Does it make a difference to how we accumulate knowledge and learning?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: That's a deep question.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: It's hard to know.
[Guest]: Hard to measure those things.
[Guest]: I think education is part of the issue.
[Guest]: The other part is the conversational part you're talking about, the fact that, you know,
[Guest]: you and I are having this conversation.
[Guest]: I think it's very high quality.
[Guest]: By the way, I'm really enjoying it tremendously.
[Guest]: You asked me to be on your program for two to three hours, and I thought, oh, that sounds
[Guest]: horrible.
[Guest]: Two to three hours.
[Guest]: That's too long.
[Guest]: But I'm really enjoying it.
[Guest]: And one of the reasons I'm enjoying it is that my cell phone is on airplane mode, and
[Guest]: I have not looked at it since we started talking.
[Guest]: That doesn't happen in real life anymore.
[Guest]: I don't talk to anybody for an hour without looking at a cell phone.
[Guest]: Well, I do on EconTalk.
[Guest]: But outside of these kind of conversations, when is the last time in my casual life that
[Guest]: I go that long without looking at my phone?
[Guest]: Not that often.
[Guest]: Now, I keep the Jewish Sabbath.
[Guest]: So for 25 hours a week, from sunset on Friday to dark on Saturday, I do not look at my phone.
[Guest]: So I have to add that footnote.
[Guest]: And I think that's very valuable.
[Guest]: I encourage people to keep a Sabbath of technology of some kind.
[Guest]: It's a lot easier to keep it, though, if you think it's part of a servant of the divine.
[Guest]: It's hard to do.
[Guest]: It's just sort of a habit you've adopted, in my experience, anyway.
[Guest]: But that degrades, that constant checking.
[Guest]: I've turned off most of my notifications.
[Guest]: That's not what distracts me.
[Guest]: It's just the phones being there.
[Guest]: So we talk at different times about, oh, I should put my phone away during dinner.
[Guest]: I don't consult my phone during dinner, except that's not 100% true.
[Guest]: Sometimes we'll be talking about something, and some question will come up, and I'll just
[Guest]: Google it real quickly, or I'll check the weather.
[Guest]: Because I wonder what it's going to be like this week.
[Guest]: What should we do?
[Guest]: Instead of just saying, I'll check the weather later, I check it now.
[Guest]: It's hard to wait.
[Guest]: Delayed gratification of that kind has become very difficult.
[Guest]: And then what if I forget?
[Guest]: What if I don't check the weather when I'm done talking about it later?
[Guest]: There's no consequence to that at all, really, ever.
[Guest]: I'm going to check it when I'm about to go out, and I'll know whether to take the umbrella
[Guest]: or the thicker coat or whatever.
[Guest]: So the whole thing is kind of silly.
[Guest]: It's a compulsive addiction.
[Guest]: So I think to come back to our earlier conversation about conversation, I think what technology
[Guest]: has done is it's made some of the conversations harder, and it's made some easier.
[Guest]: We wouldn't be having this conversation if it weren't for Twitter and Zoom and podcasting
[Guest]: and iTunes and all the things that came before this and my headset, and it's an extraordinary
[Guest]: amount of technology that's making the quality—and by the way, you and I are looking at each
[Guest]: other on Zoom, muted, while we're recording this on Zencaster, and you think about what
[Guest]: a gift that is that we can interact visually 10,000, 12,000 miles apart.
[Guest]: That's extraordinary.
[Guest]: So, you know, but the optimistic side of me says that norms will emerge about how to use
[Guest]: our phones and how to interact with technology that will help make it better.
[Guest]: But it's a real mixed bag.
[Amit Varma]: There's no doubt about it.
[Amit Varma]: And how do you think this will impact education in the long run?
[Amit Varma]: Because of this pandemic, people are now getting so much more used to Zoom classes, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And I know that just being on Zoom for a couple of hours is just more exhausting than being
[Amit Varma]: somewhere in person.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's very hard.
[Guest]: I think that the real problem with Zoom right now and remote education like this is the—you
[Guest]: know, when you're in a class of 50 people, 100 people, and there's—let's call it just
[Guest]: a webinar.
[Guest]: You're in a webinar.
[Guest]: You're not in a normal Zoom call of, say, four or five people at a meeting.
[Guest]: You're listening to somebody who's teaching something.
[Guest]: How many people are actually listening with anything close to 100% focus?
[Guest]: Everybody's checking their email.
[Guest]: Oh, but not that much.
[Guest]: It's OK.
[Guest]: I didn't check it that much.
[Guest]: I mean, that's a big problem.
[Guest]: You know, when I give a lecture in person, I know when people are paying attention and
[Guest]: when they're not.
[Guest]: I know when they're daydreaming.
[Guest]: They're not checking their phone usually in a lecture I'm giving, either rude or they're
[Guest]: actually interested.
[Guest]: But I know when they're paying attention, even if they're not using their phone, they
[Guest]: could still be not paying attention.
[Guest]: I can feel it.
[Guest]: A good speaker knows when they've captured the attention of the audience.
[Guest]: And in classes today, almost nobody's paying attention, really, 100% full attention engaged.
[Guest]: It's really hard to do for us as one of many participants.
[Guest]: So I think that's got a lot of limits right now.
[Guest]: When I lecture in educational programs, I ask people to turn off their phone.
[Guest]: But a lot of people say, well, I want to take notes on my laptop.
[Guest]: Well, OK.
[Guest]: But that's really hard, really hard to take notes on your laptop and not go check the
[Guest]: weather, your email, Twitter, Instagram, whatever.
[Guest]: I think it's a real challenge.
[Guest]: So it's interesting, again, technology has so much potential, I think, to allow large
[Guest]: groups of people to learn from great teachers.
[Guest]: And yet we've not really figured that out yet.
[Guest]: So I think mainly it's degrading education right now, not enhancing it.
[Guest]: Having said that, in the pandemic, it's been a lifesaver, a world saver to be able to continue
[Guest]: to interact with people.
[Guest]: If you think about forget the gains of information and knowledge that people have been able to
[Guest]: use to reduce the worst effects of the pandemic, but just the ability to still stay connected
[Guest]: to other human beings.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't think we can imagine what it was like to be part of the plague in medieval
[Guest]: times where you couldn't leave your house.
[Guest]: And remember, when you were stuck in your house, there wasn't any Internet, so you didn't
[Guest]: know what was happening anywhere else.
[Guest]: You know, part of the thing I found so interesting about the pandemic is that we don't know when
[Guest]: it's going to end.
[Guest]: So it's giving us a tiny taste of what it's like to be in war.
[Guest]: In war, you know, you can lose, but even if you win, when's it going to end?
[Guest]: When do we get normal life back?
[Guest]: When can I go out at night?
[Guest]: You know, when the bombs are falling and you know death is lurking, you want it to end
[Guest]: and you could deal with it better if you said, okay, it's horrible right now, but in six
[Guest]: weeks it's over.
[Guest]: But it's not.
[Guest]: We don't know when it's over.
[Guest]: We don't know when the last day is.
[Guest]: So that's really, really hard.
[Guest]: Now put yourself in medieval times in the plague.
[Guest]: Not only do you not know when it's going to end, you've got no access to information about
[Guest]: when it's going to end.
[Guest]: You're just sitting, holed up in your house, worried about your kids dying, and you're
[Guest]: cut off from almost everything.
[Guest]: So that's just, I mean, that's just really, that's tough.
[Guest]: So technology has helped us get through this a little bit.
[Guest]: But that uncertainty is very hard for us, I think, as human beings.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, we are almost at the end of the two hours, which you'd promised me.
[Amit Varma]: So I won't take much more of your time.
[Amit Varma]: A bunch of final questions.
[Amit Varma]: You know, as an educator, especially teaching economics, I guess one of the challenges you
[Amit Varma]: must have faced, certainly a challenge when I face when I write about these subjects is
[Amit Varma]: that so many of the ideas we talk about are so counterintuitive, like the positive sumness
[Amit Varma]: of the world, like emergent order.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we tend to we are again wired to think of what Adam Smith called the man of
[Amit Varma]: system where you can plan everything from the top down.
[Amit Varma]: And if you had to pick sort of one idea, which you can implant into everybody's brain as
[Amit Varma]: a hardwired idea, what would that be?
[Amit Varma]: And if you could take out a little bit of hardwiring in everyone's brain from what they
[Amit Varma]: already have, what would that be?
[Guest]: I don't know the answer to that.
[Guest]: It's a good question.
[Guest]: You know, there are some core ideas in economics, emergent order being one of them, the idea
[Guest]: that not everything that you see in the world around you is the result of somebody's scheme.
[Guest]: That's a super counterintuitive idea.
[Guest]: And once you appreciate it, you start to see it in a lot of places that you wouldn't otherwise
[Guest]: notice it.
[Guest]: You know, something trivial like the noise level in a restaurant, like, why is everyone
[Guest]: yelling?
[Guest]: Can we all just quiet down or traffic?
[Guest]: You start to realize this isn't somebody's fault, this is just how things are set up
[Guest]: right now.
[Guest]: I mean, an example would be we've spent a lot of time, you and I, in this two hours
[Guest]: talking about the state of discourse, conversation and political discourse in particular for
[Guest]: a good chunk of our conversation.
[Guest]: And we didn't, I don't think we talked enough, much about, explicitly about the media, but
[Guest]: the media is off, you know, doing all this weird stuff right now, advocacy, ideology,
[Guest]: weird, different time.
[Guest]: I think it's very destructive.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Why don't they just stop doing that?
[Guest]: And the answer is, well, all the incentives are lined up to make them that way.
[Guest]: So don't get mad at them.
[Guest]: Understand it, see if you can think of ways to change the incentives.
[Guest]: Try not to make the incentives work on you.
[Guest]: Try to step back from them when you can.
[Guest]: And we talked about the dopamine you get from crushing someone on Twitter or whatever.
[Guest]: Recognize that that's not a great thing to be incentivized by, even though you do have
[Guest]: that incentive.
[Guest]: So in terms of economic ideas, I think that idea that there are things that emerge without
[Guest]: anyone's attention is probably the deepest inside of economics that, you know, I've tried
[Guest]: to help people understand as best I can.
[Guest]: I don't know what else, what I take away.
[Guest]: I don't have an easy, quick thought on that.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I had an episode on the importance of emergent order and everything with Matt
[Amit Varma]: Ridley called the evolution of everything, I'll link that from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: My penultimate question, I just have a couple of more questions.
[Amit Varma]: My penultimate question, in your book, you quoted from the Talmud, where you said, quote,
[Amit Varma]: it is not up to you to finish the work, but you are not free to desist from it, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I get the sense from your work from listening to econ talk.
[Amit Varma]: And I know that much of econ talk, whatever the model behind it might be much of econ
[Amit Varma]: talk just feels so much like a labor of love that all your listeners should be truly grateful
[Amit Varma]: for.
[Amit Varma]: It's like it's being driven by a sense of a mission.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what drives you now and how has it changed from what used to drive you in
[Amit Varma]: the past?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what drives you to do this?
[Guest]: Well, I get paid.
[Guest]: I mean, econ talk is a project of Liberty Fund, which is a institution organization
[Guest]: in Indianapolis that publishes great books that are often forgotten, like David Ricardo
[Guest]: and Adam Smith and works on the American founding and law and economics.
[Guest]: So it's not like it's a charitable endeavor.
[Guest]: I don't want people to misunderstand that.
[Guest]: But it is a labor of love, like all good work can be.
[Guest]: It's a strange thing, because every Monday, an hour or so of my conversation gets put
[Guest]: up on the web, a conversation with another person.
[Guest]: And a lot of people download it compared to, say, five, 10 years ago.
[Guest]: But I don't know how many listen.
[Guest]: We're going to have technology soon.
[Guest]: I hope that'll help me figure that out.
[Guest]: But even if they listen, you don't know if they're really, as we've been talking about,
[Guest]: pay attention.
[Guest]: We don't know how many of them grasp or engage with or absorb the information.
[Guest]: And so I have this weird relationship, which you have, too, with tens of thousands of human
[Guest]: beings on our planet who are used to hearing me for an hour a week, week in, week out.
[Guest]: And I've never met almost—I've met hardly any of them.
[Guest]: So they know me.
[Guest]: They feel close to me, which is interesting, right?
[Guest]: We have no real relationship, but they feel close to me, which occasionally they send
[Guest]: me an email and I feel it, which is beautiful.
[Guest]: But most of what I'm doing with EconTalk, I can't—it's the same—talk about the
[Guest]: seen and the unseen.
[Guest]: I can't measure it.
[Guest]: I can't grasp it.
[Guest]: I'm just—you know, it's kind of like we send out these signals to other civilizations
[Guest]: on other stars, other planets, other, you know, planetary systems.
[Guest]: We don't know if anybody's listening.
[Guest]: Could be nobody is.
[Guest]: Maybe there's nobody out there.
[Guest]: It could be there's all these people laughing at us or enjoying it, but it's too far
[Guest]: away.
[Guest]: They don't get it until after we've died.
[Guest]: Podcasting is a little bit like that.
[Guest]: It's a strange, strange, beautiful thing.
[Guest]: Radio is the same way, where—or writing a book, it's not much different, right?
[Guest]: I know thousands of people bought my book called How Adam Smith Can Change Your Life.
[Guest]: I know at least one person read it carefully, his name is Amit Varma, but that's just
[Guest]: all I get, you know?
[Guest]: I don't get a lot more than that.
[Guest]: You know, my dad passed away this past March, and I've been thinking about him a lot,
[Guest]: of course, over the last few months.
[Guest]: He loved to write author's letters, and it always amazed him that they wrote back,
[Guest]: and they would often.
[Guest]: It's not like he did it relentlessly, but he did it sometimes.
[Guest]: And he would write poets and novelists, and sometimes he would point out things in their
[Guest]: work that he didn't agree with, or he thought they made a mistake, it was an error, and
[Guest]: he wanted to let them know.
[Guest]: And sometimes he just wanted to tell me that he loved their work, and they would often
[Guest]: write back.
[Guest]: And I always thought, and he often thought, isn't that strange?
[Guest]: Why do they bother to write me back?
[Guest]: And the answer is because somebody read it.
[Guest]: Somebody read my book.
[Guest]: Oh, I've got to write back.
[Guest]: What are you talking about?
[Guest]: Because otherwise you're in the dark.
[Guest]: You don't know.
[Guest]: And so I think that's just really interesting, you know?
[Guest]: My dad had a letter from Robert Penn Warren, one of my favorite poets, one of my favorite
[Guest]: novelists.
[Guest]: That's so cool, but why would Robert Penn Warren write my dad?
[Guest]: Because it was a human interaction.
[Guest]: It was a chance to have a conversation, not email, a different kind of letter, not talk,
[Guest]: but something.
[Amit Varma]: That's so insightful and even moving.
[Amit Varma]: A final question before we end this conversation, which I've also enjoyed so much, is that sitting
[Amit Varma]: now in 2020 with vision that is anything but 2020, when there is so much uncertainty all
[Amit Varma]: around and we can see what's happening to our politics, to our discourse, to our media,
[Amit Varma]: as you pointed out, to our education.
[Amit Varma]: If you were to look forward to the year 2030, what gives you despair and what gives you
[Guest]: hope?
[Guest]: You know, I don't have as much hope as I used to have.
[Guest]: I used to be much more optimistic.
[Guest]: Part of my optimism used to be because of the institutions we talked about that help
[Guest]: things work well, and that would be free markets.
[Guest]: All those institutions are being degraded right now in America.
[Guest]: So that's very concerning.
[Guest]: So I have a little less optimism.
[Guest]: I guess I fall back on the James Buchanan quote, the great economist who said, when
[Guest]: I look to the future, I'm pessimistic.
[Guest]: When I look to the past, I'm optimistic.
[Guest]: And what he meant by that was, like right now, like you're saying, we're in troubled
[Guest]: times.
[Guest]: It seems really scary.
[Guest]: Don't know where we're headed, very unclear.
[Guest]: There have been such times in the past.
[Guest]: And we got over them.
[Guest]: We got through them.
[Guest]: He would pick, when I heard him say that, I think he talked about the 1930s.
[Guest]: That was depressing.
[Guest]: You had a monolithic communist state, the Soviet Union, that was wicked, that did horrible
[Guest]: things to its citizens.
[Guest]: You had a rising Nazi regime in Germany, which would lead to, both those together would lead
[Guest]: to tens of millions of deaths.
[Guest]: There was a Great Depression, a worldwide thing that in the United States at a point
[Guest]: was 25%.
[Guest]: So things got better.
[Guest]: So one argument says things usually get better.
[Guest]: So I fall back on that.
[Guest]: I fall back on the idea also that if you live in a moderately free society, as we both do,
[Guest]: we're blessed we're not in North Korea, we're not in Cuba, we're not in Syria.
[Guest]: Those are tough places.
[Guest]: But in our, you know, you and I are talking a lot about the tragedy of the current political
[Guest]: situation, the lack of civility, the distraction of technology.
[Guest]: It still remains the case that I'm going to have in a few minutes, my wife and I are going
[Guest]: to have lunch.
[Guest]: And I can smile and we can laugh and we can share each other's company.
[Guest]: And you and I are having this conversation, not quite as good as the one I'm going to
[Guest]: have with my wife and me, but it's been a special conversation.
[Guest]: Not everything takes place in the political realm.
[Guest]: Not everything takes place in Washington, D.C.
[Guest]: Not everything takes place on Twitter.
[Guest]: Still plenty of places where you can let your heart sing and you can dance.
[Guest]: And you can't dance on the dance floor right now so well with the pandemic, but I can put
[Guest]: on the shallow and dance plenty in my living room, in my underwear if I want, you know,
[Guest]: it's just, there's plenty of good things left in life.
[Guest]: So it's easy to get depressed about the state of the world.
[Guest]: It's probably better to focus more on your own smaller corner, your own garden, keep
[Guest]: it clean, let some things grow there and not try to solve all the world's problems, even
[Guest]: though it's tempting that you and I probably think we ought to be trying, but got plenty
[Guest]: of problems at home to work on, make those better, enjoy lunch.
[Amit Varma]: Russ, thank you so much for coming on The Scene and The Unseen, it's been a great honor
[Guest]: for me.
[Guest]: It was great, Amit.
[Guest]: Loved it.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow Russ on Twitter at Econ Talker.
[Amit Varma]: That's Econ Talker, one word.
[Amit Varma]: I will link to his podcast, his website, and his books in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can check out the writing course that I mentioned, which I conduct online at IndiaUncut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Registrations for the August batches will open soon.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse the archives of The Scene and The Unseen at SceneUnseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: You're welcome.